<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="III" name="III"/>III</h2>
			<p>When George Duroy found himself in the street he hesitated as to what he
should do. He wanted to run, to dream, to walk about thinking of the
future as he breathed the soft night air, but the thought of the series
of articles asked for by Daddy Walter haunted him, and he decided to go
home at once and set to work.</p>
			<p>He walked along quickly, reached the outer boulevards, and followed
their line as far as the Rue Boursault, where he dwelt. The house, six
stories high, was inhabited by a score of small households,
trades-people or workmen, and he experienced a sickening sensation of
disgust, a longing to leave the place and live like well-to-do people in
a clean dwelling, as he ascended the stairs, lighting himself with wax
matches on his way up the dirty steps, littered with bits of paper,
cigarette ends, and scraps of kitchen refuse. A stagnant stench of
cooking, cesspools and humanity, a close smell of dirt and old walls,
which no rush of air could have driven out of the building, filled it
from top to bottom.</p>
			<p>The young fellow’s room, on the fifth floor, looked into a kind of
abyss, the huge cutting of the Western Railway just above the outlet by
the tunnel of the Batignolles station. Duroy opened his window and
leaned against the rusty iron cross-bar.</p>
			<p>Below him, at the bottom of the dark hole, three motionless red lights
resembled the eyes of huge wild animals, and further on a glimpse could
be caught of others, and others again still further. Every moment
whistles, prolonged or brief, pierced the silence of the night, some
near at hand, others scarcely discernible, coming from a distance from
the direction of Asnières. Their modulations were akin to those of the
human voice. One of them came nearer and nearer, with its plaintive
appeal growing louder and louder every moment, and soon a big yellow
light appeared advancing with a loud noise, and Duroy watched the
string of railway carriages swallowed up by the tunnel.</p>
			<p>Then he said to himself: “Come, let’s go to work.”</p>
			<p>He placed his light upon the table, but at the moment of commencing he
found that he had only a quire of letter paper in the place. More the
pity, but he would make use of it by opening out each sheet to its full
extent. He dipped his pen in ink, and wrote at the head of the page, in
his best hand, “Recollections of a Chasseur d’Afrique.”</p>
			<p>Then he tried to frame the opening sentence. He remained with his head
on his hands and his eyes fixed on the white sheet spread out before
him. What should he say? He could no longer recall anything of what he
had been relating a little while back; not an anecdote, not a fact,
nothing.</p>
			<p>All at once the thought struck him: “I must begin with my departure.”</p>
			<p>And he wrote: “It was in 1874, about the middle of May, when France, in
her exhaustion, was reposing after the catastrophe of the terrible
year.”</p>
			<p>He stopped short, not knowing how to lead up to what should follow⁠—his
embarkation, his voyage, his first impressions.</p>
			<p>After ten minutes’ reflection, he resolved to put off the introductory
slip till to-morrow, and to set to work at once to describe Algiers.</p>
			<p>And he traced on his paper the words: “Algiers is a white city,” without
being able to state anything further. He recalled in his mind the pretty
white city flowing down in a cascade of flat-roofed dwellings from the
summit of its hills to the sea, but he could no longer find a word to
express what he had seen and felt.</p>
			<p>After a violent effort, he added: “It is partly inhabited by Arabs.”</p>
			<p>Then he threw down his pen and rose from his chair.</p>
			<p>On his little iron bedstead, hollowed in the center by the pressure of
his body, he saw his everyday garments cast down there, empty, worn,
limp, ugly as the clothing at the morgue. On a straw-bottomed chair his
tall hat, his only one, brim uppermost, seemed to be awaiting an alms.</p>
			<p>The wall paper, gray with blue bouquets, showed as many stains as
flowers, old suspicious-looking stains, the origin of which could not be
defined; crushed insects or drops of oil; finger tips smeared with
pomatum or soapy water scattered while washing. It smacked of shabby,
genteel poverty, the poverty of a Paris lodging-house. Anger rose within
him at the wretchedness of his mode of living. He said to himself that
he must get out of it at once; that he must finish with this irksome
existence the very next day.</p>
			<p>A frantic desire of working having suddenly seized on him again, he sat
down once more at the table, and began anew to seek for phrases to
describe the strange and charming physiognomy of Algiers, that ante-room
of vast and mysterious Africa; the Africa of wandering Arabs and unknown
tribes of negroes; that unexplored Africa of which we are sometimes
shown in public gardens the improbable-looking animals seemingly made to
figure in fairy tales; the ostriches, those exaggerated fowls; the
gazelles, those divine goats; the surprising and grotesque giraffes; the
grave-looking camels, the monstrous hippopotomi, the shapeless
rhinosceri, and the gorillas, those frightful-looking brothers of
mankind.</p>
			<p>He vaguely felt ideas occurring to him; he might perhaps have uttered
them, but he could not put them into writing. And his impotence
exasperated him, he got up again, his hands damp with perspiration, and
his temples throbbing.</p>
			<p>His eyes falling on his washing bill, brought up that evening by the
concierge, he was suddenly seized with wild despair. All his joy
vanishing in a twinkling, with his confidence in himself and his faith
in the future. It was all up; he could not do anything, he would never
be anybody; he felt played out, incapable, good for nothing, damned.</p>
			<p>And he went and leaned out of the window again, just as a train issued
from the tunnel with a loud and violent noise. It was going away, afar
off, across the fields and plains towards the sea. And the recollection
of his parents stirred in Duroy’s breast. It would pass near them, that
train, within a few leagues of their house. He saw it again, the little
house at the entrance to the village of Canteleu, on the summit of the
slope overlooking Rouen and the immense valley of the Seine.</p>
			<p>His father and mother kept a little inn, a place where the tradesfolk of
the suburbs of Rouen came out to lunch on Sunday at the sign of the
Belle Vue. They had wanted to make a gentleman of their son, and had
sent him to college. Having finished his studies, and been plowed for
his bachelor’s degree, he had entered on his military service with the
intention of becoming an officer, a colonel, a general. But, disgusted
with military life long before the completion of his five years’ term
of service, he had dreamed of making a fortune at Paris.</p>
			<p>He came there at the expiration of his term of service, despite the
entreaties of his father and mother, whose visions having evaporated,
wanted now to have him at home with them. In his turn he hoped to
achieve a future; he foresaw a triumph by means as yet vaguely defined
in his mind, but which he felt sure he could scheme out and further.</p>
			<p>He had had some successful love affairs in the regiment, some easy
conquests, and even some adventures in a better class of society, having
seduced a tax collector’s daughter, who wanted to leave her home for his
sake, and a lawyer’s wife, who had tried to drown herself in despair at
being abandoned.</p>
			<p>His comrades used to say of him: “He is a sharp fellow, a deep one to
get out of a scrape, a chap who knows which side his bread is buttered,”
and he had promised himself to act up to this character.</p>
			<p>His conscience, Norman by birth, worn by the daily dealings of garrison
life, rendered elastic by the examples of pillaging in Africa, illicit
commissions, shaky dodges; spurred, too, by the notions of honor current
in the army, military bravadoes, patriotic sentiments, the fine-sounding
tales current among sub-officers, and the vain glory of the profession
of arms, had become a kind of box of tricks in which something of
everything was to be found.</p>
			<p>But the wish to succeed reigned sovereign in it.</p>
			<p>He had, without noticing it, began to dream again as he did every
evening. He pictured to himself some splendid love adventure which
should bring about all at once the realization of his hopes. He married
the daughter of some banker or nobleman met with in the street, and
captivated at the first glance.</p>
			<p>The shrill whistle of a locomotive which, issuing from the tunnel like a
big rabbit bolting out of its hole, and tearing at full speed along the
rails towards the machine shed where it was to take its rest, awoke him
from his dream.</p>
			<p>Then, repossessed by the vague and joyful hope which ever haunted his
mind, he wafted a kiss into the night, a kiss of love addressed to the
vision of the woman he was awaiting, a kiss of desire addressed to the
fortune he coveted. Then he closed his window and began to undress,
murmuring:</p>
			<p>“I shall feel in a better mood for it to-morrow. My thoughts are not
clear to-night. Perhaps, too, I have had just a little too much to
drink. One can’t work well under those circumstances.”</p>
			<p>He got into bed, blew out his light, and went off to sleep almost
immediately.</p>
			<p>He awoke early, as one awakes on mornings of hope and trouble, and
jumping out of bed, opened his window to drink a cup of fresh air, as he
phrased it.</p>
			<p>The houses of the Rue de Rome opposite, on the other side of the broad
railway cutting, glittering in the rays of the rising sun, seemed to be
painted with white light. Afar off on the right a glimpse was caught of
the slopes of Argenteuil, the hills of Sannois, and the windmills of
Orgemont through a light bluish mist; like a floating and transparent
veil cast onto the horizon.</p>
			<p>Duroy remained for some minutes gazing at the distant country side, and
he murmured: “It would be devilish nice out there a day like this.” Then
he bethought himself that he must set to work, and that at once, and
also send his concierge’s lad, at a cost of ten sous, to the office to
say that he was ill.</p>
			<p>He sat down at his table, dipped his pen in the ink, leaned his forehead
on his hand, and sought for ideas. All in vain, nothing came.</p>
			<p>He was not discouraged, however. He thought, “Bah! I am not accustomed
to it. It is a trade to be learned like all other trades. I must have
some help the first time. I will go and find Forestier, who will give me
a start for my article in ten minutes.”</p>
			<p>And he dressed himself.</p>
			<p>When he got into the street he came to the conclusion that it was still
too early to present himself at the residence of his friend, who must be
a late sleeper. He therefore walked slowly along beneath the trees of
the outer boulevards. It was not yet nine o’clock when he reached the
Parc Monceau, fresh from its morning watering. Sitting down upon a bench
he began to dream again. A well-dressed young man was walking up and
down at a short distance, awaiting a woman, no doubt. Yes, she appeared,
close veiled and quick stepping, and taking his arm, after a brief clasp
of the hand, they walked away together.</p>
			<p>A riotous need of love broke out in Duroy’s heart, a need of amours at
once distinguished and delicate. He rose and resumed his journey,
thinking of Forestier. What luck the fellow had!</p>
			<p>He reached the door at the moment his friend was coming out of it. “You
here at this time of day. What do you want of me?”</p>
			<p>Duroy, taken aback at meeting him thus, just as he was starting off,
stammered: “You see, you see, I can’t manage to write my article; you
know the article Monsieur Walter asked me to write on Algeria. It is
not very surprising, considering that I have never written anything.
Practice is needed for that, as for everything else. I shall get used to
it very quickly, I am sure, but I do not know how to set about
beginning. I have plenty of ideas, but I cannot manage to express them.”</p>
			<p>He stopped, hesitatingly, and Forestier smiled somewhat slyly, saying:
“I know what it is.”</p>
			<p>Duroy went on: “Yes, it must happen to everyone at the beginning. Well,
I came, I came to ask you for a lift. In ten minutes you can give me a
start, you can show me how to shape it. It will be a good lesson in
style you will give me, and really without you I do not see how I can
get on with it.”</p>
			<p>Forestier still smiled, and tapping his old comrade on the arm, said:
“Go in and see my wife; she will settle your business quite as well as I
could. I have trained her for that kind of work. I, myself, have not
time this morning, or I would willingly have done it for you.”</p>
			<p>Duroy suddenly abashed, hesitated, feeling afraid.</p>
			<p>“But I cannot call on her at this time of the day.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes; she is up. You will find her in my study arranging some notes
for me.”</p>
			<p>Duroy refused to go upstairs, saying: “No, I can’t think of such a
thing.”</p>
			<p>Forestier took him by the shoulders, twisted him round on his heels, and
pushing him towards the staircase, said: “Go along, you great donkey,
when I tell you to. You are not going to oblige me to go up these
flights of stairs again to introduce you and explain the fix you are
in.”</p>
			<p>Then Duroy made up his mind. “Thanks, then, I will go up,” he said. “I
shall tell her that you forced me, positively forced me to come and see
her.”</p>
			<p>“All right. She won’t scratch your eyes out. Above all, do not forget
our appointment for three o’clock.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! don’t be afraid about that.”</p>
			<p>Forestier hastened off, and Duroy began to ascend the stairs slowly,
step by step, thinking over what he should say, and feeling uneasy as to
his probable reception.</p>
			<p>The man servant, wearing a blue apron, and holding a broom in his hand,
opened the door to him.</p>
			<p>“Master is not at home,” he said, without waiting to be spoken to.</p>
			<p>Duroy persisted.</p>
			<p>“Ask Madame Forestier,” said he, “whether she will receive me, and tell
her that I have come from her husband, whom I met in the street.”</p>
			<p>Then he waited while the man went away, returned, and opening the door
on the right, said: “Madame will see you, sir.”</p>
			<p>She was seated in an office armchair in a small room, the walls of which
were wholly hidden by books carefully ranged on shelves of black wood.
The bindings, of various tints, red, yellow, green, violet, and blue,
gave some color and liveliness to those monotonous lines of volumes.</p>
			<p>She turned round, still smiling. She was wrapped in a white dressing
gown, trimmed with lace, and as she held out her hand, displayed her
bare arm in its wide sleeve.</p>
			<p>“Already?” said she, and then added: “That is not meant for a reproach,
but a simple question.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, madame, I did not want to come up, but your husband, whom I met at
the bottom of the house, obliged me to. I am so confused that I dare not
tell you what brings me.”</p>
			<p>She pointed to a chair, saying: “Sit down and tell me about it.”</p>
			<p>She was twirling a goose-quill between her fingers, and in front of her
was a half-written page, interrupted by the young fellow’s arrival. She
seemed quite at home at this work table, as much at her ease as if in
her drawing-room, engaged on everyday tasks. A faint perfume emanated
from her dressing gown, the fresh perfume of a recent toilet. Duroy
sought to divine, fancied he could trace, the outline of her plump,
youthful figure through the soft material enveloping it.</p>
			<p>She went on, as he did not reply: “Well, come tell me what is it.”</p>
			<p>He murmured, hesitatingly: “Well, you see⁠—but I really dare not⁠—I was
working last night very late and quite early this morning on the article
upon Algeria, upon which Monsieur Walter asked me to write, and I could
not get on with it⁠—I tore up all my attempts. I am not accustomed to
this kind of work, and I came to ask Forestier to help me this once⁠—”</p>
			<p>She interrupted him, laughing heartily. “And he told you to come and see
me? That is a nice thing.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, madame. He said that you will get me out of my difficulty better
than himself, but I did not dare, I did not wish to⁠—you understand.”</p>
			<p>She rose, saying: “It will be delightful to work in collaboration with
you like that. I am charmed at the notion. Come, sit down in my place,
for they know my hand-writing at the office. And we will knock you off
an article; oh, but a good one.”</p>
			<p>He sat down, took a pen, spread a sheet of paper before him, and waited.</p>
			<p>Madame Forestier, standing by, watched him make these preparations, then
took a cigarette from the mantel-shelf, and lit it.</p>
			<p>“I cannot work without smoking,” said she. “Come, what are you going to
say?”</p>
			<p>He lifted his head towards her with astonishment.</p>
			<p>“But that is just what I don’t know, since it is that I came to see you
about.”</p>
			<p>She replied: “Oh, I will put it in order for you. I will make the sauce,
but then I want the materials of the dish.”</p>
			<p>He remained embarrassed before her. At length he said, hesitatingly: “I
should like to relate my journey, then, from the beginning.”</p>
			<p>Then she sat down before him on the other side of the table, and looking
him in the eyes:</p>
			<p>“Well, tell it me first; for myself alone, you understand, slowly and
without forgetting anything, and I will select what is to be used of
it.”</p>
			<p>But as he did not know where to commence, she began to question him as a
priest would have done in the confessional, putting precise questions
which recalled to him forgotten details, people encountered and faces
merely caught sight of.</p>
			<p>When she had made him speak thus for about a quarter of an hour, she
suddenly interrupted him with: “Now we will begin. In the first place,
we will imagine that you are narrating your impressions to a friend,
which will allow you to write a lot of tom-foolery, to make remarks of
all kinds, to be natural and funny if we can. Begin:</p>
			<p>“ ‘My Dear Henry⁠—You want to know what Algeria is like, and you shall.
I will send you, having nothing else to do in a little cabin of dried
mud which serves me as a habitation, a kind of journal of my life, day
by day, and hour by hour. It will be a little lively at times, more is
the pity, but you are not obliged to show it to your lady friends.’ ”</p>
			<p>She paused to re-light her cigarette, which had gone out, and the faint
creaking of the quill on the paper stopped, too.</p>
			<p>“Let us continue,” said she.</p>
			<p>“Algeria is a great French country on the frontiers of the great unknown
countries called the Desert, the Sahara, central Africa, etc., etc.</p>
			<p>“Algiers is the door, the pretty white door of this strange continent.</p>
			<p>“But it is first necessary to get to it, which is not a rosy job for
everyone. I am, you know, an excellent horseman, since I break in the
colonel’s horses; but a man may be a very good rider and a very bad
sailor. That is my case.</p>
			<p>“You remember Surgeon-Major Simbretras, whom we used to call Old
Ipecacuanha, and how, when we thought ourselves ripe for a twenty-four
hours’ stay in the infirmary, that blessed sojourning place, we used to
go up before him.</p>
			<p>“How he used to sit in his chair, with his fat legs in his red trousers,
wide apart, his hands on his knees, and his elbows stuck, rolling his
great eyes and gnawing his white moustache.</p>
			<p>“You remember his favorite mode of treatment: ‘This man’s stomach is
out of order. Give him a dose of emetic number three, according to my
prescription, and then twelve hours off duty, and he will be all right.’</p>
			<p>“It was a sovereign remedy that emetic⁠—sovereign and irresistible. One
swallowed it because one had to. Then when one had undergone the effects
of Old Ipecacuanha’s prescription, one enjoyed twelve well-earned hours’
rest.</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear fellow, to reach Africa, it is necessary to undergo for
forty hours the effects of another kind of irresistible emetic,
according to the prescription of the Compagnie Transatlantique.”</p>
			<p>She rubbed her hands, delighted with the idea.</p>
			<p>She got up and walked about, after having lit another cigarette, and
dictated as she puffed out little whiffs of smoke, which, issuing at
first through a little round hole in the midst of her compressed lips,
slowly evaporated, leaving in the air faint gray lines, a kind of
transparent mist, like a spider’s web. Sometimes with her open hand she
would brush these light traces aside; at others she would cut them
asunder with her forefinger, and then watch with serious attention the
two halves of the almost impenetrable vapor slowly disappear.</p>
			<p>Duroy, with his eyes, followed all her gestures, her attitudes, the
movements of her form and features⁠—busied with this vague pastime which
did not preoccupy her thoughts.</p>
			<p>She now imagined the incidents of the journey, sketched traveling
companions invented by herself, and a love affair with the wife of a
captain of infantry on her way to join her husband.</p>
			<p>Then, sitting down again, she questioned Duroy on the topography of
Algeria, of which she was absolutely ignorant. In ten minutes she knew
as much about it as he did, and she dictated a little chapter of
political and colonial geography to coach the reader up in such matters
and prepare him to understand the serious questions which were to be
brought forward in the following articles. She continued by a trip into
the provinces of Oran, a fantastic trip, in which it was, above all, a
question of women, Moorish, Jewish, and Spanish.</p>
			<p>“That is what interests most,” she said.</p>
			<p>She wound up by a sojourn at Saïda, at the foot of the great tablelands;
and by a pretty little intrigue between the sub-officer, George Duroy,
and a Spanish work-girl employed at the <i>alfa</i> factory at Ain el Hadjar.
She described their rendezvous at night amidst the bare, stony hills,
with jackals, hyenas, and Arab dogs yelling, barking and howling among
the rocks.</p>
			<p>And she gleefully uttered the words: “To be continued.” Then rising, she
added: “That is how one writes an article, my dear sir. Sign it, if you
please.”</p>
			<p>He hesitated.</p>
			<p>“But sign it, I tell you.”</p>
			<p>Then he began to laugh, and wrote at the bottom of the page, “George
Duroy.”</p>
			<p>She went on smoking as she walked up and down; and he still kept looking
at her, unable to find anything to say to thank her, happy to be with
her, filled with gratitude, and with the sensual pleasure of this
new-born intimacy. It seemed to him that everything surrounding him was
part of her, everything down to the walls covered with books. The
chairs, the furniture, the air in which the perfume of tobacco was
floating, had something special, nice, sweet, and charming, which
emanated from her.</p>
			<p>Suddenly she asked: “What do you think of my friend, Madame de Marelle?”</p>
			<p>He was surprised, and answered: “I think⁠—I think⁠—her very charming.”</p>
			<p>“Is it not so?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, certainly.”</p>
			<p>He longed to add: “But not so much as yourself,” but dared not.</p>
			<p>She resumed: “And if you only knew how funny, original, and intelligent
she is. She is a Bohemian⁠—a true Bohemian. That is why her husband
scarcely cares for her. He only sees her defects, and does not
appreciate her good qualities.”</p>
			<p>Duroy felt stupefied at learning that Madame de Marelle was married, and
yet it was only natural that she should be.</p>
			<p>He said: “Oh, she is married, then! And what is her husband?”</p>
			<p>Madame Forestier gently shrugged her shoulders, and raised her eyebrows,
with a gesture of incomprehensible meaning.</p>
			<p>“Oh! he is an inspector on the Northern Railway. He spends eight days
out of the month in Paris. What his wife calls ‘obligatory service,’ or
‘weekly duty,’ or ‘holy week.’ When you know her better you will see how
nice and bright she is. Go and call on her one of these days.”</p>
			<p>Duroy no longer thought of leaving. It seemed to him that he was going
to stop for ever; that he was at home.</p>
			<p>But the door opened noiselessly, and a tall gentleman entered without
being announced. He stopped short on seeing a stranger. Madame Forestier
seemed troubled for a moment; then she said in natural tones, though a
slight rosy flush had risen to her cheeks:</p>
			<p>“Come in, my dear sir. I must introduce one of Charles’ old friends,
Monsieur George Duroy, a future journalist.” Then in another tone, she
added: “Our best and most intimate friend, the Count de Vaudrec.”</p>
			<p>The two men bowed, looking each other in the eyes, and Duroy at once
took his leave.</p>
			<p>There was no attempt to detain him. He stammered a few thanks, grasped
the outstretched hand of Madame Forestier, bowed again to the new-comer,
who preserved the cold, grave air of a man of position, and went out
quite disturbed, as if he had made a fool of himself.</p>
			<p>On finding himself once more in the street, he felt sad and uneasy,
haunted by the vague idea of some hidden vexation. He walked on, asking
himself whence came this sudden melancholy. He could not tell, but the
stern face of the Count de Vaudrec, already somewhat aged, with gray
hair, and the calmly insolent look of a very wealthy man, constantly
recurred to his recollection. He noted that the arrival of this unknown,
breaking off a charming <i>tête-à-tête</i>, had produced in him that chilly,
despairing sensation that a word overheard, a trifle noticed, the least
thing suffices sometimes to bring about. It seemed to him, too, that
this man, without his being able to guess why, had been displeased at
finding him there.</p>
			<p>He had nothing more to do till three o’clock, and it was not yet noon.
He had still six francs fifty centimes in his pocket, and he went and
lunched at a Bouillon Duval. Then he prowled about the boulevard, and
as three o’clock struck, ascended the staircase, in itself an
advertisement, of the <i>Vie Francaise</i>.</p>
			<p>The messengers-in-waiting were seated with folded arms on a bench, while
at a kind of desk a doorkeeper was sorting the correspondence that had
just arrived. The entire get-up of the place, intended to impress
visitors, was perfect. Everyone had the appearance, bearing, dignity,
and smartness suitable to the ante-room of a large newspaper.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur Walter, if you please?” inquired Duroy.</p>
			<p>“The manager is engaged, sir,” replied the doorkeeper. “Will you take a
seat, sir?” and he indicated the waiting-room, already full of people.</p>
			<p>There were men grave, important-looking, and decorated; and men without
visible linen, whose frock-coats, buttoned up to the chin, bore upon the
breast stains recalling the outlines of continents and seas on
geographical maps. There were three women among them. One of them was
pretty, smiling, and decked out, and had the air of a gay woman; her
neighbor, with a wrinkled, tragic countenance, decked out also, but in
more severe fashion, had about her something worn and artificial which
old actresses generally have; a kind of false youth, like a scent of
stale love. The third woman, in mourning, sat in a corner, with the air
of a desolate widow. Duroy thought that she had come to ask for charity.</p>
			<p>However, no one was ushered into the room beyond, and more than twenty
minutes had elapsed.</p>
			<p>Duroy was seized with an idea, and going back to the doorkeeper, said:
“Monsieur Walter made an appointment for me to call on him here at three
o’clock. At all events, see whether my friend, Monsieur Forestier, is
here.”</p>
			<p>He was at once ushered along a lengthy passage, which brought him to a
large room where four gentlemen were writing at a large green-covered
table.</p>
			<p>Forestier standing before the fireplace was smoking a cigarette and
playing at cup and ball. He was very clever at this, and kept spiking
the huge ball of yellow boxwood on the wooden point. He was counting
“Twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five.”</p>
			<p>“Twenty-six,” said Duroy.</p>
			<p>His friend raised his eyes without interrupting the regular movement of
his arm, saying: “Oh! here you are, then. Yesterday I landed the ball
fifty-seven times right off. There is only Saint-Potin who can beat me
at it among those here. Have you seen the governor? There is nothing
funnier than to see that old tubby Norbert playing at cup and ball. He
opens his mouth as if he was going to swallow the ball every time.”</p>
			<p>One of the others turned round towards him, saying: “I say, Forestier, I
know of one for sale, a beauty in West Indian wood; it is said to have
belonged to the Queen of Spain. They want sixty francs for it. Not
dear.”</p>
			<p>Forestier asked: “Where does it hang out?”</p>
			<p>And as he had missed his thirty-seventh shot, he opened a cupboard in
which Duroy saw a score of magnificent cups and balls, arranged and
numbered like a collection of art objects. Then having put back the one
he had been using in its usual place, he repeated: “Where does this gem
hang out?”</p>
			<p>The journalist replied: “At a box-office keeper’s of the Vaudeville. I
will bring it you to-morrow, if you like.”</p>
			<p>“All right. If it is really a good one I will take it; one can never
have too many.” Then turning to Duroy he added: “Come with me. I will
take you in to see the governor; otherwise you might be getting mouldy
here till seven in the evening.”</p>
			<p>They re-crossed the waiting-room, in which the same people were waiting
in the same order. As soon as Forestier appeared the young woman and the
old actress, rising quickly, came up to him. He took them aside one
after the other into the bay of the window, and although they took care
to talk in low tones, Duroy noticed that they were on familiar terms.</p>
			<p>Then, having passed through two padded doors, they entered the manager’s
room. The conference which had been going on for an hour or so was
nothing more than a game at ecarté with some of the gentlemen with the
flat brimmed hats whom Duroy had noticed the night before.</p>
			<p>Monsieur Walter dealt and played with concentrated attention and crafty
movements, while his adversary threw down, picked up, and handled the
light bits of colored pasteboard with the swiftness, skill, and grace of
a practiced player. Norbert de Varenne, seated in the managerial
armchair, was writing an article. Jacques Rival, stretched at full
length on a couch, was smoking a cigar with his eyes closed.</p>
			<p>The room smelled close, with that blended odor of leather-covered
furniture, stale tobacco, and printing-ink peculiar to editors’ rooms
and familiar to all journalists. Upon the black wood table, inlaid with
brass, lay an incredible pile of papers, letters, cards, newspapers,
magazines, bills, and printed matter of every description.</p>
			<p>Forestier shook hands with the punters standing behind the card players,
and without saying a word watched the progress of the game; then, as
soon as Daddy Walter had won, he said: “Here is my friend, Duroy.”</p>
			<p>The manager glanced sharply at the young fellow over the glasses of his
spectacles, and said:</p>
			<p>“Have you brought my article? It would go very well to-day with the
Morel debate.”</p>
			<p>Duroy took the sheets of paper folded in four from his pocket, saying:
“Here it is sir.”</p>
			<p>The manager seemed pleased, and remarked, with a smile: “Very good, very
good. You are a man of your word. You must look through this for me,
Forestier.”</p>
			<p>But Forestier hastened to reply: “It is not worth while, Monsieur
Walter. I did it with him to give him a lesson in the tricks of the
trade. It is very well done.”</p>
			<p>And the manager, who was gathering up the cards dealt by a tall, thin
gentleman, a deputy belonging to the Left Center, remarked with
indifference: “All right, then.”</p>
			<p>Forestier, however, did not let him begin the new game, but stooping,
murmured in his ear: “You know you promised me to take on Duroy to
replace Marambot. Shall I engage him on the same terms?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, certainly.”</p>
			<p>Taking his friend’s arm, the journalist led him away, while Monsieur
Walter resumed the game.</p>
			<p>Norbert de Varenne had not lifted his head; he did not appear to have
seen or recognized Duroy. Jacques Rival, on the contrary, had taken his
hand with the marked and demonstrative energy of a comrade who may be
reckoned upon in the case of any little difficulty.</p>
			<p>They passed through the waiting-room again, and as everyone looked at
them, Forestier said to the youngest of the women, in a tone loud enough
to be heard by the rest: “The manager will see you directly. He is just
now engaged with two members of the Budget Committee.”</p>
			<p>Then he passed swiftly on, with an air of hurry and importance, as
though about to draft at once an article of the utmost weight.</p>
			<p>As soon as they were back in the reporters’ room Forestier at once took
up his cup and ball, and as he began to play with it again, said to
Duroy, breaking his sentences in order to count: “You will come here
every day at three o’clock, and I will tell you the places you are to go
to, either during the day or in the evening, or the next morning⁠—one⁠—I
will give you, first of all, a letter of introduction to the head of the
First Department of the Préfecture of Police⁠—two⁠—who will put you in
communication with one of his clerks. You will settle with him about all
the important information⁠—three⁠—from the Préfecture, official and
quasi-official information, you know. In all matters of detail you will
apply to Saint-Potin, who is up in the work⁠—four⁠—You can see him
by-and-by, or to-morrow. You must, above all, cultivate the knack of
dragging information out of men I send you to see⁠—five⁠—and to get in
everywhere, in spite of closed doors⁠—six⁠—You will have for this a
salary of two hundred francs a month, with two sous a line for the
paragraphs you glean⁠—seven⁠—and two sous a line for all articles
written by you to order on different subjects⁠—eight.”</p>
			<p>Then he gave himself up entirely to his occupation, and went on slowly
counting: “Nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen.” He missed the
fourteenth, and swore, “Damn that thirteen, it always brings me bad
luck. I shall die on the thirteenth of some month, I am certain.”</p>
			<p>One of his colleagues who had finished his work also took a cup and ball
from the cupboard. He was a little man, who looked like a boy, although
he was really five-and-thirty. Several other journalists having come in,
went one after the other and got out the toy belonging to each of them.
Soon there were six standing side by side, with their backs to the wall,
swinging into the air, with even and regular motion, the balls of red,
yellow, and black, according to the wood they were made of. And a match
having begun, the two who were still working got up to act as umpires.
Forestier won by eleven points. Then the little man, with the juvenile
aspect, who had lost, rang for the messenger, and gave the order, “Nine
bocks.” And they began to play again pending the arrival of these
refreshments.</p>
			<p>Duroy drank a glass of beer with his new comrades, and then said to his
friend: “What am I to do now?”</p>
			<p>“I have nothing for you to-day. You can go if you want to.”</p>
			<p>“And our⁠—our⁠—article, will it go in to-night?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but do not bother yourself about it; I will correct the proofs.
Write the continuation for to-morrow, and come here at three o’clock,
the same as to-day.”</p>
			<p>Duroy having shaken hands with everyone, without even knowing their
names, went down the magnificent staircase with a light heart and high
spirits.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
