<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 9</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="IX" name="IX"/>IX</h2>
			<p>George Duroy had returned to all his old habits.</p>
			<p>Installed at present in the little ground-floor suite of rooms in the
Rue de Constantinople, he lived soberly, like a man preparing a new
existence for himself.</p>
			<p>Madame Forestier had not yet returned. She was lingering at Cannes. He
received a letter from her merely announcing her return about the middle
of April, without a word of allusion to their farewell. He was waiting,
his mind was thoroughly made up now to employ every means in order to
marry her, if she seemed to hesitate. But he had faith in his luck,
confidence in that power of seduction which he felt within him, a vague
and irresistible power which all women felt the influence of.</p>
			<p>A short note informed him that the decisive hour was about to strike: “I
am in Paris. Come and see me.⁠—Madeleine Forestier.”</p>
			<p>Nothing more. He received it by the nine o’clock post. He arrived at her
residence at three on the same day. She held out both hands to him
smiling with her pleasant smile, and they looked into one another’s eyes
for a few seconds. Then she said: “How good you were to come to me there
under those terrible circumstances.”</p>
			<p>“I should have done anything you told me to,” he replied.</p>
			<p>And they sat down. She asked the news, inquired about the Walters, about
all the staff, about the paper. She had often thought about the paper.</p>
			<p>“I miss that a great deal,” she said, “really a very great deal. I had
become at heart a journalist. What would you, I love the profession?”</p>
			<p>Then she paused. He thought he understood, he thought he divined in her
smile, in the tone of her voice, in her words themselves a kind of
invitation, and although he had promised to himself not to precipitate
matters, he stammered out: “Well, then⁠—why⁠—why should you not
resume⁠—this occupation⁠—under⁠—under the name of Duroy?”</p>
			<p>She suddenly became serious again, and placing her hand on his arm,
murmured: “Do not let us speak of that yet a while.”</p>
			<p>But he divined that she accepted, and falling at her knees began to
passionately kiss her hands, repeating: “Thanks, thanks; oh, how I love
you!”</p>
			<p>She rose. He did so, too, and noted that she was very pale. Then he
understood that he had pleased her, for a long time past, perhaps, and
as they found themselves face to face, he clasped her to him and printed
a long, tender, and decorous kiss on her forehead. When she had freed
herself, slipping through his arms, she said in a serious tone: “Listen,
I have not yet made up my mind to anything. However, it may be⁠—yes. But
you must promise me the most absolute secrecy till I give you leave to
speak.”</p>
			<p>He swore this, and left, his heart overflowing with joy.</p>
			<p>He was from that time forward very discreet as regards the visits he
paid her, and did not ask for any more definite consent on her part, for
she had a way of speaking of the future, of saying “by-and-by,” and of
shaping plans in which these two lives were blended, which answered him
better and more delicately than a formal acceptation.</p>
			<p>Duroy worked hard and spent little, trying to save money so as not to be
without a penny at the date fixed for his marriage, and becoming as
close as he had been prodigal. The summer went by, and then the autumn,
without anyone suspecting anything, for they met very little, and only
in the most natural way in the world.</p>
			<p>One evening, Madeleine, looking him straight in the eyes said: “You have
not yet announced our intentions to Madame de Marelle?”</p>
			<p>“No, dear, having promised you to be secret, I have not opened my mouth
to a living soul.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it is about time to tell her. I will undertake to inform the
Walters. You will do so this week, will you not?”</p>
			<p>He blushed as he said: “Yes, to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>She had turned away her eyes in order not to notice his confusion, and
said: “If you like we will be married in the beginning of May. That will
be a very good time.”</p>
			<p>“I obey you in all things with joy.”</p>
			<p>“The tenth of May, which is a Saturday, will suit me very nicely, for it
is my birthday.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, the tenth of May.”</p>
			<p>“Your parents live near Rouen, do they not? You have told me so, at
least.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, near Rouen, at Canteleu.”</p>
			<p>“What are they?”</p>
			<p>“They are⁠—they are small annuitants.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! I should very much like to know them.”</p>
			<p>He hesitated, greatly perplexed, and said: “But, you see, they are⁠—”
Then making up his mind, like a really clever man, he went on: “My dear,
they are mere country folk, innkeepers, who have pinched themselves to
the utmost to enable me to pursue my studies. For my part, I am not
ashamed of them, but their⁠—simplicity⁠—their rustic manners⁠—might,
perhaps, render you uncomfortable.”</p>
			<p>She smiled, delightfully, her face lit up with gentle kindness as she
replied: “No. I shall be very fond of them. We will go and see them. I
want to. I will speak of this to you again. I, too, am a daughter of
poor people, but I have lost my parents. I have no longer anyone in the
world.” She held out her hand to him as she added: “But you.”</p>
			<p>He felt softened, moved, overcome, as he had been by no other woman.</p>
			<p>“I had thought about one matter,” she continued, “but it is rather
difficult to explain.”</p>
			<p>“What is it?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Well, it is this, my dear boy, I am like all women, I have my
weaknesses, my pettinesses. I love all that glitters, that catches the
ear. I should have so delighted to have borne a noble name. Could you
not, on the occasion of your marriage, ennoble yourself a little?”</p>
			<p>She had blushed in her turn, as if she had proposed something
indelicate.</p>
			<p>He replied simply enough: “I have often thought about it, but it did not
seem to me so easy.”</p>
			<p>“Why so?”</p>
			<p>He began to laugh, saying: “Because I was afraid of making myself look
ridiculous.”</p>
			<p>She shrugged her shoulders. “Not at all, not at all Every one does it,
and nobody laughs. Separate your name in two⁠—Du Roy. That looks very
well.”</p>
			<p>He replied at once like a man who understands the matter in question:
“No, that will not do at all. It is too simple, too common, too
well-known. I had thought of taking the name of my native place, as a
literary pseudonym at first, then of adding it to my own by degrees, and
then, later on, of even cutting my name in two, as you suggest.”</p>
			<p>“Your native place is Canteleu?” she queried.</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>She hesitated, saying: “No, I do not like the termination. Come, cannot
we modify this word Canteleu a little?”</p>
			<p>She had taken up a pen from the table, and was scribbling names and
studying their physiognomy. All at once she exclaimed: “There, there it
is!” and held out to him a paper, on which read⁠—“Madame Duroy de
Cantel.”</p>
			<p>He reflected a few moments, and then said gravely: “Yes, that does very
well.”</p>
			<p>She was delighted, and kept repeating “Duroy de Cantel, Duroy de Cantel,
Madame Duroy de Cantel. It is capital, capital.” She went on with an air
of conviction: “And you will see how easy it is to get everyone to
accept it. But one must know how to seize the opportunity, for it will
be too late afterwards. You must from to-morrow sign your descriptive
articles D. de Cantel, and your ‘Echoes’ simply Duroy. It is done every
day in the press, and no one will be astonished to see you take a
pseudonym. At the moment of our marriage we can modify it yet a little
more, and tell our friends that you had given up the ‘Du’ out of modesty
on account of your position, or even say nothing about it. What is your
father’s Christian name?”</p>
			<p>“Alexander.”</p>
			<p>She murmured: “Alexander, Alexander,” two or three times, listening to
the sonorous roll of the syllables, and then wrote on a blank sheet of
paper:</p>
			<p>“Monsieur and Madame Alexander Du Roy de Cantel have the honor to inform
you of the marriage of Monsieur George Du Roy de Cantel, their son, to
Madame Madeleine Forestier.” She looked at her writing, holding it at a
distance, charmed by the effect, and said: “With a little method we can
manage whatever we wish.”</p>
			<p>When he found himself once more in the street, firmly resolved to call
himself in future Du Roy, and even Du Roy de Cantel, it seemed to him
that he had acquired fresh importance. He walked with more swagger, his
head higher, his moustache fiercer, as a gentleman should walk. He felt
in himself a species of joyous desire to say to the passers-by: “My name
is Du Roy de Cantel.”</p>
			<p>But scarcely had he got home than the thought of Madame de Marelle made
him feel uneasy, and he wrote to her at once to ask her to make an
appointment for the next day.</p>
			<p>“It will be a tough job,” he thought. “I must look out for squalls.”</p>
			<p>Then he made up his mind for it, with the native carelessness which
caused him to slur over the disagreeable side of life, and began to
write a fancy article on the fresh taxes needed in order to make the
Budget balance. He set down in this the nobiliary “De” at a hundred
francs a year, and titles, from baron to prince, at from five hundred to
five thousand francs. And he signed it “D. de Cantel.”</p>
			<p>He received a telegram from his mistress next morning saying that she
would call at one o’clock. He waited for her somewhat feverishly, his
mind made up to bring things to a point at once, to say everything right
out, and then, when the first emotion had subsided, to argue cleverly in
order to prove to her that he could not remain a bachelor for ever, and
that as Monsieur de Marelle insisted on living, he had been obliged to
think of another than herself as his legitimate companion. He felt
moved, though, and when he heard her ring his heart began to beat.</p>
			<p>She threw herself into his arms, exclaiming: “Good morning, Pretty-boy.”
Then, finding his embrace cold, looked at him, and said: “What is the
matter with you?”</p>
			<p>“Sit down,” he said, “we have to talk seriously.”</p>
			<p>She sat down without taking her bonnet off, only turning back her veil,
and waited.</p>
			<p>He had lowered his eyes, and was preparing the beginning of his speech.
He commenced in a low tone of voice: “My dear one, you see me very
uneasy, very sad, and very much embarrassed at what I have to admit to
you. I love you dearly. I really love you from the bottom of my heart,
so that the fear of causing you pain afflicts me more than even the news
I am going to tell you.”</p>
			<p>She grew pale, felt herself tremble, and stammered out: “What is the
matter? Tell me at once.”</p>
			<p>He said in sad but resolute tones, with that feigned dejection which we
make use of to announce fortunate misfortunes: “I am going to be
married.”</p>
			<p>She gave the sigh of a woman who is about to faint, a painful sigh from
the very depths of her bosom, and then began to choke and gasp without
being able to speak.</p>
			<p>Seeing that she did not say anything, he continued: “You cannot imagine
how much I suffered before coming to this resolution. But I have neither
position nor money. I am alone, lost in Paris. I needed beside me
someone who above all would be an adviser, a consoler, and a stay. It is
a partner, an ally, that I have sought, and that I have found.”</p>
			<p>He was silent, hoping that she would reply, expecting furious rage,
violence, and insults. She had placed one hand on her heart as though to
restrain its throbbings, and continued to draw her breath by painful
efforts, which made her bosom heave spasmodically and her head nod to
and fro. He took her other hand, which was resting on the arm of the
chair, but she snatched it away abruptly. Then she murmured, as though
in a state of stupefaction: “Oh, my God!”</p>
			<p>He knelt down before her, without daring to touch her, however, and more
deeply moved by this silence than he would have been by a fit of anger,
stammered out: “Clo! my darling Clo! just consider my situation,
consider what I am. Oh! if I had been able to marry you, what happiness
it would have been. But you are married. What could I do? Come, think of
it, now. I must take a place in society, and I cannot do it so long as I
have not a home. If you only knew. There are days when I have felt a
longing to kill your husband.”</p>
			<p>He spoke in his soft, subdued, seductive voice, a voice which entered
the ear like music. He saw two tears slowly gather in the fixed and
staring eyes of his mistress and then roll down her cheeks, while two
more were already formed on the eyelids.</p>
			<p>He murmured: “Do not cry, Clo; do not cry, I beg of you. You rend my
very heart.”</p>
			<p>Then she made an effort, a strong effort, to be proud and dignified, and
asked, in the quivering tone of a woman about to burst into sobs: “Who
is it?”</p>
			<p>He hesitated a moment, and then understanding that he must, said:</p>
			<p>“Madeleine Forestier.”</p>
			<p>Madame de Marelle shuddered all over, and remained silent, so deep in
thought that she seemed to have forgotten that he was at her feet. And
two transparent drops kept continually forming in her eyes, falling and
forming again.</p>
			<p>She rose. Duroy guessed that she was going away without saying a word,
without reproach or forgiveness, and he felt hurt and humiliated to the
bottom of his soul. Wishing to stay her, he threw his arms about the
skirt of her dress, clasping through the stuff her rounded legs, which
he felt stiffen in resistance. He implored her, saying: “I beg of you,
do not go away like that.”</p>
			<p>Then she looked down on him from above with that moistened and
despairing eye, at once so charming and so sad, which shows all the
grief of a woman’s heart, and gasped out: “I⁠—I have nothing to say. I
have nothing to do with it. You⁠—you are right. You⁠—you have chosen
well.”</p>
			<p>And, freeing herself by a backward movement, she left the room without
his trying to detain her further.</p>
			<p>Left to himself, he rose as bewildered as if he had received a blow on
the head. Then, making up his mind, he muttered: “Well, so much the
worse or the better. It is over, and without a scene; I prefer that,”
and relieved from an immense weight, suddenly feeling himself free,
delivered, at ease as to his future life, he began to spar at the wall,
hitting out with his fists in a kind of intoxication of strength and
triumph, as if he had been fighting Fate.</p>
			<p>When Madame Forestier asked: “Have you told Madame de Marelle?” he
quietly answered, “Yes.”</p>
			<p>She scanned him closely with her bright eyes, saying: “And did it not
cause her any emotion?”</p>
			<p>“No, not at all. She thought it, on the contrary, a very good idea.”</p>
			<p>The news was soon known. Some were astonished, others asserted that they
had foreseen it; others, again, smiled, and let it be understood that
they were not surprised.</p>
			<p>The young man who now signed his descriptive articles D. de Cantel, his
“Echoes” Duroy, and the political articles which he was beginning to
write from time to time Du Roy, passed half his time with his betrothed,
who treated him with a fraternal familiarity into which, however,
entered a real but hidden love, a species of desire concealed as a
weakness. She had decided that the marriage should be quite private,
only the witnesses being present, and that they should leave the same
evening for Rouen. They would go the next day to see the journalist’s
parents, and remain with them some days. Duroy had striven to get her to
renounce this project, but not having been able to do so, had ended by
giving in to it.</p>
			<p>So the tenth of May having come, the newly-married couple, having
considered the religious ceremony useless since they had not invited
anyone, returned to finish packing their boxes after a brief visit to
the Town Hall. They took, at the Saint Lazare terminus, the six o’clock
train, which bore them away towards Normandy. They had scarcely
exchanged twenty words up to the time that they found themselves alone
in the railway carriage. As soon as they felt themselves under way, they
looked at one another and began to laugh, to hide a certain feeling of
awkwardness which they did not want to manifest.</p>
			<p>The train slowly passed through the long station of Batignolles, and
then crossed the mangy-looking plain extending from the fortifications
to the Seine. Duroy and his wife from time to time made a few idle
remarks, and then turned again towards the windows. When they crossed
the bridge of Asniéres, a feeling of greater liveliness was aroused in
them at the sight of the river covered with boats, fishermen, and
oarsmen. The sun, a bright May sun, shed its slanting rays upon the
craft and upon the smooth stream, which seemed motionless, without
current or eddy, checked, as it were, beneath the heat and brightness of
the declining day. A sailing boat in the middle of the river having
spread two large triangular sails of snowy canvas, wing and wing, to
catch the faintest puffs of wind, looked like an immense bird preparing
to take flight.</p>
			<p>Duroy murmured: “I adore the neighborhood of Paris. I have memories of
dinners which I reckon among the pleasantest in my life.”</p>
			<p>“And the boats,” she replied. “How nice it is to glide along at sunset.”</p>
			<p>Then they became silent, as though afraid to continue their outpourings
as to their past life, and remained so, already enjoying, perhaps, the
poesy of regret.</p>
			<p>Duroy, seated face to face with his wife, took her hand and slowly
kissed it. “When we get back again,” said he, “we will go and dine
sometimes at Chatou.”</p>
			<p>She murmured: “We shall have so many things to do,” in a tone of voice
that seemed to imply, “The agreeable must be sacrificed to the useful.”</p>
			<p>He still held her hand, asking himself with some uneasiness by what
transition he should reach the caressing stage. He would not have felt
uneasy in the same way in presence of the ignorance of a young girl, but
the lively and artful intelligence he felt existed in Madeleine,
rendered his attitude an embarrassed one. He was afraid of appearing
stupid to her, too timid or too brutal, too slow or too prompt. He kept
pressing her hand gently, without her making any response to this
appeal. At length he said: “It seems to me very funny for you to be my
wife.”</p>
			<p>She seemed surprised as she said: “Why so?”</p>
			<p>“I do not know. It seems strange to me. I want to kiss you, and I feel
astonished at having the right to do so.”</p>
			<p>She calmly held out her cheek to him, which he kissed as he would have
kissed that of a sister.</p>
			<p>He continued: “The first time I saw you⁠—you remember the dinner
Forestier invited me to⁠—I thought, ‘Hang it all, if I could only find a
wife like that.’ Well, it’s done. I have one.”</p>
			<p>She said, in a low tone: “That is very nice,” and looked him straight in
the face, shrewdly, and with smiling eyes.</p>
			<p>He reflected, “I am too cold. I am stupid. I ought to get along quicker
than this,” and asked: “How did you make Forestier’s acquaintance?”</p>
			<p>She replied, with provoking archness: “Are we going to Rouen to talk
about him?”</p>
			<p>He reddened, saying: “I am a fool. But you frighten me a great deal.”</p>
			<p>She was delighted, saying: “I⁠—impossible! How is it?”</p>
			<p>He had seated himself close beside her. She suddenly exclaimed: “Oh! a
stag.”</p>
			<p>The train was passing through the forest of Saint Germaine, and she had
seen a frightened deer clear one of the paths at a bound. Duroy, leaning
forward as she looked out of the open window, printed a long kiss, a
lover’s kiss, among the hair on her neck. She remained still for a few
seconds, and then, raising her head, said: “You are tickling me. Leave
off.”</p>
			<p>But he would not go away, but kept on pressing his curly moustache
against her white skin in a long and thrilling caress.</p>
			<p>She shook herself, saying: “Do leave off.”</p>
			<p>He had taken her head in his right hand, passed around her, and turned
it towards him. Then he darted on her mouth like a hawk on its prey. She
struggled, repulsed him, tried to free herself. She succeeded at last,
and repeated: “Do leave off.”</p>
			<p>He remained seated, very red and chilled by this sensible remark; then,
having recovered more self-possession, he said, with some liveliness:
“Very well, I will wait, but I shan’t be able to say a dozen words till
we get to Rouen. And remember that we are only passing through Poissy.”</p>
			<p>“I will do the talking then,” she said, and sat down quietly beside him.</p>
			<p>She spoke with precision of what they would do on their return. They
must keep on the suite of apartments that she had resided in with her
first husband, and Duroy would also inherit the duties and salary of
Forestier at the <i>Vie Francaise</i>. Before their union, besides, she had
planned out, with the certainty of a man of business, all the financial
details of their household. They had married under a settlement
preserving to each of them their respective estates, and every incident
that might arise⁠—death, divorce, the birth of one or more children⁠—was
duly provided for. The young fellow contributed a capital of four
thousand francs, he said, but of that sum he had borrowed fifteen
hundred. The rest was due to savings effected during the year in view of
the event. Her contribution was forty thousand francs, which she said
had been left her by Forestier.</p>
			<p>She returned to him as a subject of conversation. “He was a very steady,
economical, hard-working fellow. He would have made a fortune in a very
short time.”</p>
			<p>Duroy no longer listened, wholly absorbed by other thoughts. She stopped
from time to time to follow out some inward train of ideas, and then
went on: “In three or four years you can be easily earning thirty to
forty thousand francs a year. That is what Charles would have had if he
had lived.”</p>
			<p>George, who began to find the lecture rather a long one, replied: “I
thought we were not going to Rouen to talk about him.”</p>
			<p>She gave him a slight tap on the cheek, saying, with a laugh: “That is
so. I am in the wrong.”</p>
			<p>He made a show of sitting with his hands on his knees like a very good
boy.</p>
			<p>“You look very like a simpleton like that,” said she.</p>
			<p>He replied: “That is my part, of which, by the way, you reminded me just
now, and I shall continue to play it.”</p>
			<p>“Why?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Because it is you who take management of the household, and even of me.
That, indeed, concerns you, as being a widow.”</p>
			<p>She was amazed, saying: “What do you really mean?”</p>
			<p>“That you have an experience that should enlighten my ignorance, and
matrimonial practice that should polish up my bachelor innocence, that’s
all.”</p>
			<p>“That is too much,” she exclaimed.</p>
			<p>He replied: “That is so. I don’t know anything about ladies; no, and you
know all about gentlemen, for you are a widow. You must undertake my
education⁠—this evening⁠—and you can begin at once if you like.”</p>
			<p>She exclaimed, very much amused: “Oh, indeed, if you reckon on me for
that!”</p>
			<p>He repeated, in the tone of a school boy stumbling through his lesson:
“Yes, I do. I reckon that you will give me solid information⁠—in twenty
lessons. Ten for the elements, reading and grammar; ten for finishing
accomplishments. I don’t know anything myself.”</p>
			<p>She exclaimed, highly amused: “You goose.”</p>
			<p>He replied: “If that is the familiar tone you take, I will follow your
example, and tell you, darling, that I adore you more and more every
moment, and that I find Rouen a very long way off.”</p>
			<p>He spoke now with a theatrical intonation and with a series of changes
of facial expression, which amused his companion, accustomed to the ways
of literary Bohemia. She glanced at him out of the corner of her eye,
finding him really charming, and experiencing the longing we have to
pluck a fruit from the tree at once, and the check of reason which
advises us to wait till dinner to eat it at the proper time. Then she
observed, blushing somewhat at the thoughts which assailed her: “My dear
little pupil, trust my experience, my great experience. Kisses in a
railway train are not worth anything. They only upset one.” Then she
blushed still more as she murmured: “One should never eat one’s corn in
the ear.”</p>
			<p>He chuckled, kindling at the double meanings from her pretty mouth, and
made the sign of the cross, with a movement of the lips, as though
murmuring a prayer, adding aloud: “I have placed myself under the
protection of St. Anthony, patron-saint of temptations. Now I am
adamant.”</p>
			<p>Night was stealing gently on, wrapping in its transparent shadow, like a
fine gauze, the broad landscape stretching away to the right. The train
was running along the Seine, and the young couple began to watch the
crimson reflections on the surface of the river, winding like a broad
strip of polished metal alongside the line, patches fallen from the sky,
which the departing sun had kindled into flame. These reflections slowly
died out, grew deeper, faded sadly. The landscape became dark with that
sinister thrill, that deathlike quiver, which each twilight causes to
pass over the earth. This evening gloom, entering the open window,
penetrated the two souls, but lately so lively, of the now silent pair.</p>
			<p>They had drawn more closely together to watch the dying day. At Nantes
the railway people had lit the little oil lamp, which shed its yellow,
trembling light upon the drab cloth of the cushions. Duroy passed his
arms round the waist of his wife, and clasped her to him. His recent
keen desire had become a softened one, a longing for consoling little
caresses, such as we lull children with.</p>
			<p>He murmured softly: “I shall love you very dearly, my little Made.”</p>
			<p>The softness of his voice stirred the young wife, and caused a rapid
thrill to run through her. She offered her mouth, bending towards him,
for he was resting his cheek upon the warm pillow of her bosom, until
the whistle of the train announced that they were nearing a station. She
remarked, flattening the ruffled locks about her forehead with the tips
of her fingers: “It was very silly. We are quite childish.”</p>
			<p>But he was kissing her hands in turn with feverish rapidity, and
replied: “I adore you, my little Made.”</p>
			<p>Until they reached Rouen they remained almost motionless, cheek against
cheek, their eyes turned to the window, through which, from time to
time, the lights of houses could be seen in the darkness, satisfied with
feeling themselves so close to one another, and with the growing
anticipation of a freer and more intimate embrace.</p>
			<p>They put up at a hotel overlooking the quay, and went to bed after a
very hurried supper.</p>
			<p>The chambermaid aroused them next morning as it was striking eight. When
they had drank the cup of tea she had placed on the night-table, Duroy
looked at his wife, then suddenly, with the joyful impulse of the
fortunate man who has just found a treasure, he clasped her in his arms,
exclaiming: “My little Made, I am sure that I love you ever so much,
ever so much, ever so much.”</p>
			<p>She smiled with her confident and satisfied smile, and murmured, as she
returned his kisses: “And I too⁠—perhaps.”</p>
			<p>But he still felt uneasy about the visit of his parents. He had already
forewarned his wife, had prepared and lectured her, but he thought fit
to do so again.</p>
			<p>“You know,” he said, “they are only rustics⁠—country rustics, not
theatrical ones.”</p>
			<p>She laughed.</p>
			<p>“But I know that: you have told me so often enough. Come, get up and let
me get up.”</p>
			<p>He jumped out of bed, and said, as he drew on his socks:</p>
			<p>“We shall be very uncomfortable there, very uncomfortable. There is only
an old straw palliasse in my room. Spring mattresses are unknown at
Canteleu.”</p>
			<p>She seemed delighted.</p>
			<p>“So much the better. It will be delightful to sleep
badly⁠—beside⁠—beside you, and to be woke up by the crowing of the
cocks.”</p>
			<p>She had put on her dressing-gown⁠—a white flannel dressing-gown⁠—which
Duroy at once recognized. The sight of it was unpleasant to him. Why?
His wife had, he was aware, a round dozen of these morning garments. She
could not destroy her trousseau in order to buy a new one. No matter, he
would have preferred that her bed-linen, her night-linen, her
under-clothing were not the same she had made use of with the other. It
seemed to him that the soft, warm stuff must have retained something
from its contact with Forestier.</p>
			<p>He walked to the window, lighting a cigarette. The sight of the port,
the broad stream covered with vessels with tapering spars, the steamers
noisily unloading alongside the quay, stirred him, although he had been
acquainted with it all for a long time past, and he exclaimed: “By Jove!
it is a fine sight.”</p>
			<p>Madeleine approached, and placing both hands on one of her husband’s
shoulders, leaned against him with careless grace, charmed and
delighted. She kept repeating: “Oh! how pretty, how pretty. I did not
know that there were so many ships as that.”</p>
			<p>They started an hour later, for they were to lunch with the old people,
who had been forewarned some days beforehand. A rusty open carriage bore
them along with a noise of jolting ironmongery. They followed a long and
rather ugly boulevard, passed between some fields through which flowed a
stream, and began to ascend the slope. Madeleine, somewhat fatigued, had
dozed off beneath the penetrating caress of the sun, which warmed her
delightfully as she lay stretched back in the old carriage as though in
a bath of light and country air.</p>
			<p>Her husband awoke her, saying: “Look!”</p>
			<p>They had halted two-thirds of the way up the slope, at a spot famous for
the view, and to which all tourists drive. They overlooked the long and
broad valley through which the bright river flowed in sweeping curves.
It could be caught sight of in the distance, dotted with numerous
islands, and describing a wide sweep before flowing through Rouen. Then
the town appeared on the right bank, slightly veiled in the morning
mist, but with rays of sunlight falling on its roofs; its thousand squat
or pointed spires, light, fragile-looking, wrought like gigantic jewels;
its round or square towers topped with heraldic crowns; its belfries;
the numerous Gothic summits of its churches, overtopped by the sharp
spire of the cathedral, that surprising spike of bronze⁠—strange, ugly,
and out of all proportion, the tallest in the world. Facing it, on the
other side of the river, rose the factory chimneys of the suburb of
Saint Serves⁠—tall, round, and broadening at their summit. More numerous
than their sister spires, they reared even in the distant country, their
tall brick columns, and vomited into the blue sky their black and coaly
breath. Highest of all, as high as the second of the summits reared by
human labor, the pyramid of Cheops, almost level with its proud
companion the cathedral spire, the great steam-pump of La Foudre seemed
the queen of the busy, smoking factories, as the other was the queen of
the sacred edifices. Further on, beyond the workmen’s town, stretched a
forest of pines, and the Seine, having passed between the two divisions
of the city, continued its way, skirting a tall rolling slope, wooded at
the summit, and showing here and there its bare bone of white stone.
Then the river disappeared on the horizon, after again describing a long
sweeping curve. Ships could be seen ascending and descending the stream,
towed by tugs as big as flies and belching forth thick smoke. Islands
were stretched along the water in a line, one close to the other, or
with wide intervals between them, like the unequal beads of a verdant
rosary.</p>
			<p>The driver waited until the travelers’ ecstasies were over. He knew from
experience the duration of the admiration of all the breed of tourists.
But when he started again Duroy suddenly caught sight of two old people
advancing towards them some hundreds of yards further on, and jumped
out, exclaiming: “There they are. I recognize them.”</p>
			<p>There were two country-folk, a man and a woman, walking with irregular
steps, rolling in their gait, and sometimes knocking their shoulders
together. The man was short and strongly built, high colored and
inclined to stoutness, but powerful, despite his years. The woman was
tall, spare, bent, careworn, the real hard-working country-woman who has
toiled afield from childhood, and has never had time to amuse herself,
while her husband has been joking and drinking with the customers.
Madeleine had also alighted from the carriage, and she watched these two
poor creatures coming towards them with a pain at her heart, a sadness
she had not anticipated. They had not recognized their son in this fine
gentleman and would never have guessed this handsome lady in the light
dress to be their daughter-in-law. They were walking on quickly and in
silence to meet their long-looked-for boy, without noticing these city
folk followed by their carriage.</p>
			<p>They passed by when George, who was laughing, cried out: “Good-day,
Daddy Duroy!”</p>
			<p>They both stopped short, amazed at first, then stupefied with surprise.
The old woman recovered herself first, and stammered, without advancing
a step: “Is’t thou, boy?”</p>
			<p>The young fellow answered: “Yes, it is I, mother,” and stepping up to
her, kissed her on both cheeks with a son’s hearty smack. Then he rubbed
noses with his father, who had taken off his cap, a very tall, black
silk cap, made Rouen fashion, like those worn by cattle dealers.</p>
			<p>Then George said: “This is my wife,” and the two country people looked
at Madeleine. They looked at her as one looks at a phenomenon, with an
uneasy fear, united in the father with a species of approving
satisfaction, in the mother with a kind of jealous enmity.</p>
			<p>The man, who was of a joyous nature and inspired by a loveliness born of
sweet cider and alcohol, grew bolder, and asked, with a twinkle in the
corner of his eyes: “I may kiss her all the same?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” replied his son, and Madeleine, ill at ease, held out both
cheeks to the sounding smacks of the rustic, who then wiped his lips
with the back of his hand. The old woman, in her turn, kissed her
daughter-in-law with a hostile reserve. No, this was not the
daughter-in-law of her dreams; the plump, fresh housewife, rosy-cheeked
as an apple, and round as a brood mare. She looked like a hussy, the
fine lady with her furbelows and her musk. For the old girl all perfumes
were musk.</p>
			<p>They set out again, walking behind the carriage which bore the trunk of
the newly-wedded pair. The old fellow took his son by the arm, and
keeping him a little in the rear of the others, asked with interest:
“Well, how goes business, lad?”</p>
			<p>“Pretty fair.”</p>
			<p>“So much the better. Has thy wife any money?”</p>
			<p>“Forty thousand francs,” answered George.</p>
			<p>His father gave vent to an admiring whistle, and could only murmur,
“Dang it!” so overcome was he by the mention of the sum. Then he added,
in a tone of serious conviction: “Dang it all, she’s a fine woman!” For
he found her to his taste, and he had passed for a good judge in his
day.</p>
			<p>Madeleine and her mother-in-law were walking side by side without
exchanging a word. The two men rejoined them. They reached the village,
a little roadside village formed of half-a-score houses on each side of
the highway, cottages and farm buildings, the former of brick and the
latter of clay, these covered with thatch and those with slates. Father
Duroy’s tavern, “The Bellevue,” a bit of a house consisting of a ground
floor and a garret, stood at the beginning of the village to the left. A
pine branch above the door indicated, in ancient fashion, that thirsty
folk could enter.</p>
			<p>The things were laid for lunch, in the common room of the tavern, on two
tables placed together and covered with two napkins. A neighbor, come in
to help to serve the lunch, bowed low on seeing such a fine lady appear;
and then, recognizing George, exclaimed: “Good Lord! is that the
youngster?”</p>
			<p>He replied gayly: “Yes, it is I, Mother Brulin,” and kissed her as he
had kissed his father and mother. Then turning to his wife, he said:
“Come into our room and take your hat off.”</p>
			<p>He ushered her through a door to the right into a cold-looking room with
tiled floor, white-washed walls, and a bed with white cotton curtains. A
crucifix above a holy-water stoup, and two colored pictures, one
representing Paul and Virginia under a blue palm tree, and the other
Napoleon the First on a yellow horse, were the only ornaments of this
clean and dispiriting apartment.</p>
			<p>As soon as they were alone he kissed Madeleine, saying: “Thanks, Made. I
am glad to see the old folks again. When one is in Paris one does not
think about it; but when one meets again, it gives one pleasure all the
same.”</p>
			<p>But his father, thumbing the partition with his fist, cried out: “Come
along, come along, the soup is ready,” and they had to sit down to
table.</p>
			<p>It was a long, countrified repast, with a succession of ill-assorted
dishes, a sausage after a leg of mutton, and an omelette after a
sausage. Father Duroy, excited by cider and some glasses of wine, turned
on the tap of his choicest jokes⁠—those he reserved for great occasions
of festivity, smutty adventures that had happened, as he maintained, to
friends of his. George, who knew all these stories, laughed,
nevertheless, intoxicated by his native air, seized on by the innate
love of one’s birthplace and of spots familiar from childhood, by all
the sensations and recollections once more renewed, by all the objects
of yore seen again once more; by trifles, such as the mark of a knife on
a door, a broken chair recalling some pretty event, the smell of the
soil, the breath of the neighboring forest, the odors of the dwelling,
the gutter, the dunghill.</p>
			<p>Mother Duroy did not speak, but remained sad and grim, watching her
daughter-in-law out of the corner of her eye, with hatred awakened in
her heart⁠—the hatred of an old toiler, an old rustic with fingers worn
and limbs bent by hard work⁠—for the city madame, who inspired her with
the repulsion of an accursed creature, an impure being, created for
idleness and sin. She kept getting up every moment to fetch the dishes
or fill the glasses with cider, sharp and yellow from the decanter, or
sweet, red, and frothing from the bottles, the corks of which popped
like those of ginger beer.</p>
			<p>Madeleine scarcely ate or spoke. She wore her wonted smile upon her
lips, but it was a sad and resigned one. She was downcast. Why? She had
wanted to come. She had not been unaware that she was going among
country folk⁠—poor country folk. What had she fancied them to be⁠—she,
who did not usually dream? Did she know herself? Do not women always
hope for something that is not? Had she fancied them more poetical? No;
but perhaps better informed, more noble, more affectionate, more
ornamental. Yet she did not want them high-bred, like those in novels.
Whence came it, then, that they shocked her by a thousand trifling,
imperceptible details, by a thousand indefinable coarsenesses, by their
very nature as rustics, by their words, their gestures, and their mirth?
She recalled her own mother, of whom she never spoke to anyone⁠—a
governess, brought up at Saint Denis⁠—seduced, and died from poverty and
grief when she, Madeleine, was twelve years old. An unknown hand had had
her brought up. Her father, no doubt. Who was he? She did not exactly
know, although she had vague suspicions.</p>
			<p>The lunch still dragged on. Customers were now coming in and shaking
hands with the father, uttering exclamations of wonderment on seeing his
son, and slyly winking as they scanned the young wife out of the corner
of their eye, which was as much as to say: “Hang it all, she’s not a
duffer, George Duroy’s wife.” Others, less intimate, sat down at the
wooden tables, calling for “A pot,” “A jugful,” “Two brandies,” “A
raspail,” and began to play at dominoes, noisily rattling the little
bits of black and white bone. Mother Duroy kept passing to and fro,
serving the customers, with her melancholy air, taking money, and wiping
the tables with the corner of her blue apron.</p>
			<p>The smoke of clay pipes and sou cigars filled the room. Madeleine began
to cough, and said: “Suppose we go out; I cannot stand it.”</p>
			<p>They had not quite finished, and old Duroy was annoyed at this. Then she
got up and went and sat on a chair outside the door, while her
father-in-law and her husband were finishing their coffee and their nip
of brandy.</p>
			<p>George soon rejoined her. “Shall we stroll down as far as the Seine?”
said he.</p>
			<p>She consented with pleasure, saying: “Oh, yes; let us go.”</p>
			<p>They descended the slope, hired a boat at Croisset, and passed the rest
of the afternoon drowsily moored under the willows alongside an island,
soothed to slumber by the soft spring weather, and rocked by the
wavelets of the river. Then they went back at nightfall.</p>
			<p>The evening’s repast, eaten by the light of a tallow candle, was still
more painful for Madeleine than that of the morning. Father Duroy, who
was half drunk, no longer spoke. The mother maintained her dogged
manner. The wretched light cast upon the gray walls the shadows of heads
with enormous noses and exaggerated movements. A great hand was seen to
raise a pitchfork to a mouth opening like a dragon’s maw whenever any
one of them, turning a little, presented a profile to the yellow,
flickering flame.</p>
			<p>As soon as dinner was over, Madeleine drew her husband out of the house,
in order not to stay in this gloomy room, always reeking with an acrid
smell of old pipes and spilt liquor. As soon as they were outside, he
said: “You are tired of it already.”</p>
			<p>She began to protest, but he stopped her, saying: “No, I saw it very
plainly. If you like, we will leave to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>“Very well,” she murmured.</p>
			<p>They strolled gently onward. It was a mild night, the deep,
all-embracing shadow of which seemed filled with faint murmurings,
rustlings, and breathings. They had entered a narrow path, overshadowed
by tall trees, and running between two belts of underwood of
impenetrable blackness.</p>
			<p>“Where are we?” asked she.</p>
			<p>“In the forest,” he replied.</p>
			<p>“Is it a large one?”</p>
			<p>“Very large; one of the largest in France.”</p>
			<p>An odor of earth, trees, and moss⁠—that fresh yet old scent of the
woods, made up of the sap of bursting buds and the dead and moldering
foliage of the thickets, seemed to linger in the path. Raising her head,
Madeleine could see the stars through the tree-tops; and although no
breeze stirred the boughs, she could yet feel around her the vague
quivering of this ocean of leaves. A strange thrill shot through her
soul and fleeted across her skin⁠—a strange pain gripped her at the
heart. Why, she did not understand. But it seemed to her that she was
lost, engulfed, surrounded by perils, abandoned by everyone; alone,
alone in the world beneath this living vault quivering there above her.</p>
			<p>She murmured: “I am rather frightened. I should like to go back.”</p>
			<p>“Well, let us do so.”</p>
			<p>“And⁠—we will leave for Paris to-morrow?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, to-morrow.”</p>
			<p>“To-morrow morning?”</p>
			<p>“To-morrow morning, if you like.”</p>
			<p>They returned home. The old folks had gone to bed. She slept badly,
continually aroused by all the country sounds so new to her⁠—the cry of
the screech owl, the grunting of a pig in a sty adjoining the house, and
the noise of a cock who kept on crowing from midnight. She was up and
ready to start at daybreak.</p>
			<p>When George announced to his parents that he was going back they were
both astonished; then they understood the origin of his wish.</p>
			<p>The father merely said: “Shall I see you again soon?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in the course of the summer.”</p>
			<p>“So much the better.”</p>
			<p>The old woman growled: “I hope you won’t regret what you have done.”</p>
			<p>He left them two hundred francs as a present to assuage their
discontent, and the carriage, which a boy had been sent in quest of,
having made its appearance at about ten o’clock, the newly-married
couple embraced the old country folk and started off once more.</p>
			<p>As they were descending the hill Duroy began to laugh.</p>
			<p>“There,” he said, “I had warned you. I ought not to have introduced you
to Monsieur and Madame du Roy de Cantel, Senior.”</p>
			<p>She began to laugh, too, and replied: “I am delighted now. They are good
folk, whom I am beginning to like very well. I will send them some
presents from Paris.” Then she murmured: “Du Roy de Cantel, you will
see that no one will be astonished at the terms of the notification of
our marriage. We will say that we have been staying for a week with your
parents on their estate.” And bending towards him she kissed the tip of
his moustache, saying: “Good morning, George.”</p>
			<p>He replied: “Good morning, Made,” as he passed an arm around her waist.</p>
			<p>In the valley below they could see the broad river like a ribbon of
silver unrolled beneath the morning sun, the factory chimneys belching
forth their clouds of smoke into the sky, and the pointed spires rising
above the old town.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
