<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="XIV" name="XIV"/>XIV</h2>
			<p>The church was draped with black, and over the main entrance a huge
scutcheon, surmounted by a coronet, announced to the passers-by that a
gentleman was being buried. The ceremony was just over, and those
present at it were slowly dispersing, defiling past the coffin and the
nephew of the Count de Vaudrec, who was shaking extended hands and
returning bows. When George Du Roy and his wife came out of the church
they began to walk homeward side by side, silent and preoccupied. At
length George said, as though speaking to himself: “Really, it is very
strange.”</p>
			<p>“What, dear?” asked Madeleine.</p>
			<p>“That Vaudrec should not have left us anything.”</p>
			<p>She blushed suddenly, as though a rosy veil had been cast over her white
skin, and said: “Why should he have left us anything? There was no
reason for it.” Then, after a few moments’ silence, she went on: “There
is perhaps a will in the hands of some notary. We know nothing as yet.”</p>
			<p>He reflected for a short time, and then murmured: “Yes, it is probable,
for, after all, he was the most intimate friend of us both. He dined
with us twice a week, called at all hours, and was at home at our place,
quite at home in every respect. He loved you like a father, and had no
children, no brothers and sisters, nothing but a nephew, and a nephew he
never used to see. Yes, there must be a will. I do not care for much,
only a remembrance to show that he thought of us, that he loved us, that
he recognized the affection we felt for him. He certainly owed us some
such mark of friendship.”</p>
			<p>She said in a pensive and indifferent manner: “It is possible, indeed,
that there may be a will.”</p>
			<p>As they entered their rooms, the man-servant handed a letter to
Madeleine. She opened it, and then held it out to her husband. It ran as
follows:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Office of Maitre Lamaneur, Notary,<br/>
“17 Rue des Vosges.</p>
				<p>“<span class="smcap">Madame</span>: I have the honor to beg you to favor me with a call
here on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday between the hours of
two and four, on business concerning you.⁠—I am,
etc.⁠—<span class="smcap">Lamaneur.</span>”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>George had reddened in turn. “That is what it must be,” said he. “It is
strange, though, that it is you who are summoned, and not myself, who am
legally the head of the family.”</p>
			<p>She did not answer at once, but after a brief period of reflection,
said: “Shall we go round there by and by?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, certainly.”</p>
			<p>They set out as soon as they had lunched. When they entered Maitre
Lamaneur’s office, the head clerk rose with marked attention and ushered
them in to his master. The notary was a round, little man, round all
over. His head looked like a ball nailed onto another ball, which had
legs so short that they almost resembled balls too. He bowed, pointed to
two chairs, and turning towards Madeleine, said: “Madame, I have sent
for you in order to acquaint you with the will of the Count de Vaudrec,
in which you are interested.”</p>
			<p>George could not help muttering: “I thought so.”</p>
			<p>The notary went on: “I will read to you the document, which is very
brief.”</p>
			<p>He took a paper from a box in front of him, and read as follows:</p>
			<p>“I, the undersigned, Paul Emile Cyprien Gontran, Count de Vaudrec, being
sound in body and mind, hereby express my last wishes. As death may
overtake us at any moment, I wish, in provision of his attacks, to take
the precaution of making my will, which will be placed in the hands of
Maitre Lamaneur. Having no direct heirs, I leave the whole of my
fortune, consisting of stock to the amount of six hundred thousand
francs, and landed property worth about five hundred thousand francs, to
Madame Claire Madeleine Du Roy without any charge or condition. I beg
her to accept this gift of a departed friend as a proof of a deep,
devoted, and respectful affection.”</p>
			<p>The notary added: “That is all. This document is dated last August, and
replaces one of the same nature, written two years back, with the name
of Madame Claire Madeleine Forestier. I have this first will, too, which
would prove, in the case of opposition on the part of the family, that
the wishes of Count de Vaudrec did not vary.”</p>
			<p>Madeleine, very pale, looked at her feet. George nervously twisted the
end of his moustache between his fingers. The notary continued after a
moment of silence: “It is, of course, understood, sir, that your wife
cannot accept the legacy without your consent.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy rose and said, dryly: “I must ask time to reflect.”</p>
			<p>The notary, who was smiling, bowed, and said in an amiable tone: “I
understand the scruples that cause you to hesitate, sir. I should say
that the nephew of Monsieur de Vaudrec, who became acquainted this very
morning with his uncle’s last wishes, stated that he was prepared to
respect them, provided the sum of a hundred thousand francs was allowed
him. In my opinion the will is unattackable, but a law-suit would cause
a stir, which it may perhaps suit you to avoid. The world often judges
things ill-naturedly. In any case, can you give me your answer on all
these points before Saturday?”</p>
			<p>George bowed, saying: “Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>Then he bowed again ceremoniously, ushered out his wife, who had
remained silent, and went out himself with so stiff an air that the
notary no longer smiled.</p>
			<p>As soon as they got home, Du Roy abruptly closed the door, and throwing
his hat onto the bed, said: “You were Vaudrec’s mistress.”</p>
			<p>Madeleine, who was taking off her veil, turned round with a start,
exclaiming: “I? Oh!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you. A man does not leave the whole of his fortune to a woman,
unless⁠—”</p>
			<p>She was trembling, and was unable to remove the pins fastening the
transparent tissue. After a moment’s reflection she stammered, in an
agitated tone: “Come, come⁠—you are mad⁠—you are⁠—you are. Did not you,
yourself, just now have hopes that he would leave us something?”</p>
			<p>George remained standing beside her, following all her emotions like a
magistrate seeking to note the least faltering on the part of an
accused. He said, laying stress on every word: “Yes, he might have left
something to me, your husband⁠—to me, his friend⁠—you understand, but
not to you⁠—my wife. The distinction is capital, essential from the
point of propriety and of public opinion.”</p>
			<p>Madeleine in turn looked at him fixedly in the eyes, in profound and
singular fashion, as though seeking to read something there, as though
trying to discover that unknown part of a human being which we never
fathom, and of which we can scarcely even catch rapid glimpses in those
moments of carelessness or inattention, which are like doors left open,
giving onto the mysterious depths of the mind. She said slowly: “It
seems to me, however, that a legacy of this importance would have been
looked on as at least equally strange left to you.”</p>
			<p>He asked abruptly: “Why so?”</p>
			<p>She said: “Because⁠—” hesitated, and then continued: “Because you are my
husband, and have only known him for a short time, after all⁠—because I
have been his friend for a very long while⁠—and because his first will,
made during Forestier’s lifetime, was already in my favor.”</p>
			<p>George began to stride up and down. He said: “You cannot accept.”</p>
			<p>She replied in a tone of indifference: “Precisely so; then it is not
worth while waiting till Saturday, we can let Maitre Lamaneur know at
once.”</p>
			<p>He stopped short in front of her, and they again stood for some moments
with their eyes riveted on one another, striving to fathom the
impenetrable secret of their hearts, to cut down to the quick of their
thoughts. They tried to see one another’s conscience unveiled in an
ardent and mute interrogation; the struggle of two beings who, living
side by side, were always ignorant of one another, suspecting, sniffing
round, watching, but never understanding one another to the muddy
depths of their souls. And suddenly he murmured to her face, in a low
voice: “Come, admit that you were De Vaudrec’s mistress.”</p>
			<p>She shrugged her shoulders, saying: “You are ridiculous. Vaudrec was
very fond of me, very⁠—but there was nothing more⁠—never.”</p>
			<p>He stamped his foot. “You lie. It is not possible.”</p>
			<p>She replied, quietly: “It is so, though.”</p>
			<p>He began to walk up and down again, and then, halting once more, said:
“Explain, then, how he came to leave the whole of his fortune to you.”</p>
			<p>She did so in a careless and disinterested tone, saying: “It is quite
simple. As you said just now, he had only ourselves for friends, or
rather myself, for he has known me from a child. My mother was a
companion at the house of some relatives of his. He was always coming
here, and as he had no natural heirs he thought of me. That there was a
little love for me in the matter is possible. But where is the woman who
has not been loved thus? Why should not such secret, hidden affection
have placed my name at the tip of his pen when he thought of expressing
his last wishes? He brought me flowers every Monday. You were not at all
astonished at that, and yet he did not bring you any, did he? Now he has
given me his fortune for the same reason, and because he had no one to
offer it to. It would have been, on the contrary, very surprising for
him to have left it to you. Why should he have done so? What were you to
him?”</p>
			<p>She spoke so naturally and quietly that George hesitated. He said,
however: “All the same, we cannot accept this inheritance under such
conditions. The effect would be deplorable. All the world would believe
it; all the world would gossip about it, and laugh at me. My fellow
journalists are already only too disposed to feel jealous of me and to
attack me. I should have, before anyone, a care for my honor and my
reputation. It is impossible for me to allow my wife to accept a legacy
of this kind from a man whom public report has already assigned to her
as a lover. Forestier might perhaps have tolerated it, but not me.”</p>
			<p>She murmured, mildly: “Well, dear, do not let us accept it. It will be a
million the less in our pockets, that is all.”</p>
			<p>He was still walking up and down, and began to think aloud, speaking for
his wife’s benefit without addressing himself directly to her: “Yes, a
million, so much the worse. He did not understand, in making his will,
what a fault in tact, what a breach of propriety he was committing. He
did not see in what a false, a ridiculous position he would place me.
Everything is a matter of detail in this life. He should have left me
half; that would have settled everything.”</p>
			<p>He sat down, crossed his legs, and began to twist the end of his
moustache, as he did in moments of boredom, uneasiness, and difficult
reflection. Madeleine took up some embroidery at which she worked from
time to time, and said, while selecting her wools: “I have only to hold
my tongue. It is for you to reflect.”</p>
			<p>He was a long time without replying, and then said, hesitatingly: “The
world will never understand that Vaudrec made you his sole heiress, and
that I allowed it. To receive his fortune in that way would be an
acknowledgment on your part of a guilty connection, and on mine of a
shameful complaisance. Do you understand now how our acceptance of it
would be interpreted? It would be necessary to find a side issue, some
clever way of palliating matters. To let it go abroad, for instance,
that he had divided the money between us, leaving half to the husband
and half to the wife.”</p>
			<p>She observed: “I do not see how that can be done, since the will is
plain.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is very simple. You could leave me half the inheritance by a
deed of gift. We have no children, so it is feasible. In that way the
mouth of public malevolence would be closed.”</p>
			<p>She replied, somewhat impatiently: “I do not see any the more how the
mouth of public malevolence is to be closed, since the will is there,
signed by Vaudrec?”</p>
			<p>He said, angrily: “Have we any need to show it and to paste it up on all
the walls? You are really stupid. We will say that the Count de Vaudrec
left his fortune between us. That is all. But you cannot accept this
legacy without my authorization. I will only give it on condition of a
division, which will hinder me from becoming a laughing stock.”</p>
			<p>She looked at him again with a penetrating glance, and said: “As you
like. I am agreeable.”</p>
			<p>Then he rose, and began to walk up and down again. He seemed to be
hesitating anew, and now avoided his wife’s penetrating glance. He was
saying: “No, certainly not. Perhaps it would be better to give it up
altogether. That is more worthy, more correct, more honorable. And yet
by this plan nothing could be imagined against us⁠—absolutely nothing.
The most unscrupulous people could only admit things as they were.” He
paused in front of Madeleine. “Well, then, if you like, darling, I will
go back alone to Maitre Lamaneur to explain matters to him and consult
him. I will tell him of my scruples, and add that we have arrived at the
notion of a division to prevent gossip. From the moment that I accept
half this inheritance, it is plain that no one has the right to smile.
It is equal to saying aloud: ‘My wife accepts because I accept⁠—I, her
husband, the best judge of what she may do without compromising herself.
Otherwise a scandal would have arisen.’ ”</p>
			<p>Madeleine merely murmured: “Just as you like.”</p>
			<p>He went on with a flow of words: “Yes, it is all as clear as daylight
with this arrangement of a division in two. We inherit from a friend who
did not want to make any difference between us, any distinction; who did
not wish to appear to say: ‘I prefer one or the other after death, as I
did during life.’ He liked the wife best, be it understood, but in
leaving the fortune equally to both, he wished plainly to express that
his preference was purely platonic. And you may be sure that, if he had
thought of it, that is what he would have done. He did not reflect. He
did not foresee the consequences. As you said very appropriately just
now, it was you to whom he offered flowers every week, it is to you he
wished to leave his last remembrance, without taking into consideration
that⁠—”</p>
			<p>She checked him, with a shade of irritation: “All right; I understand.
You have no need to make so many explanations. Go to the notary’s at
once.”</p>
			<p>He stammered, reddening: “You are right. I am off.”</p>
			<p>He took his hat, and then, at the moment of going out, said: “I will
try to settle the difficulty with the nephew for fifty thousand francs,
eh?”</p>
			<p>She replied, with dignity: “No. Give him the hundred thousand francs he
asks. Take them from my share, if you like.”</p>
			<p>He muttered, shamefacedly: “Oh, no; we will share that. Giving up fifty
thousand francs apiece, there still remains to us a clear million.” He
added: “Good-bye, then, for the present, Made.” And he went off to
explain to the notary the plan which he asserted had been imagined by
his wife.</p>
			<p>They signed the next day a deed of gift of five hundred thousand francs,
which Madeleine Du Roy abandoned to her husband. On leaving the notary’s
office, as the day was fine, George suggested that they should walk as
far as the boulevards. He showed himself pleasant and full of attention
and affection. He laughed, pleased at everything, while she remained
thoughtful and somewhat severe.</p>
			<p>It was a somewhat cool autumn day. The people in the streets seemed in a
hurry, and walked rapidly. Du Roy led his wife to the front of the shop
in which he had so often gazed at the longed-for chronometer. “Shall I
stand you some jewelry?” said he.</p>
			<p>She replied, indifferently: “Just as you like.”</p>
			<p>They went in, and he asked: “What would you prefer⁠—a necklace, a
bracelet, or a pair of earrings?”</p>
			<p>The sight of the trinkets in gold, and precious stones overcame her
studied coolness, and she scanned with kindling and inquisitive eyes the
glass cases filled with jewelry. And, suddenly moved by desire, said:
“That is a very pretty bracelet.”</p>
			<p>It was a chain of quaint pattern, every link of which had a different
stone set in it.</p>
			<p>George inquired: “How much is this bracelet?”</p>
			<p>“Three thousand francs, sir,” replied the jeweler.</p>
			<p>“If you will let me have it for two thousand five hundred, it is a
bargain.”</p>
			<p>The man hesitated, and then replied: “No, sir; that is impossible.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy went on: “Come, you can throw in that chronometer for fifteen
hundred; that will make four thousand, which I will pay at once. Is it
agreed? If not, I will go somewhere else.”</p>
			<p>The jeweler, in a state of perplexity, ended by agreeing, saying: “Very
good, sir.”</p>
			<p>And the journalist, after giving his address, added: “You will have the
monogram, G. R. C., engraved on the chronometer under a baron’s
coronet.”</p>
			<p>Madeleine, surprised, began to smile, and when they went out, took his
arm with a certain affection. She found him really clever and capable.
Now that he had an income, he needed a title. It was quite right.</p>
			<p>The jeweler bowed them out, saying: “You can depend upon me; it will be
ready on Thursday, Baron.”</p>
			<p>They paused before the Vaudeville, at which a new piece was being
played.</p>
			<p>“If you like,” said he, “we will go to the theater this evening. Let us
see if we can have a box.”</p>
			<p>They took a box, and he continued: “Suppose we dine at a restaurant.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes; I should like that!”</p>
			<p>He was as happy as a king, and sought what else they could do. “Suppose
we go and ask Madame de Marelle to spend the evening with us. Her
husband is at home, I hear, and I shall be delighted to see him.”</p>
			<p>They went there. George, who slightly dreaded the first meeting with his
mistress, was not ill-pleased that his wife was present to prevent
anything like an explanation. But Clotilde did not seem to remember
anything against him, and even obliged her husband to accept the
invitation.</p>
			<p>The dinner was lovely, and the evening pleasant. George and Madeleine
got home late. The gas was out, and to light them upstairs, the
journalist struck a wax match from time to time. On reaching the
first-floor landing the flame, suddenly starting forth as he struck,
caused their two lit-up faces to show in the glass standing out against
the darkness of the staircase. They resembled phantoms, appearing and
ready to vanish into the night.</p>
			<p>Du Roy raised his hand to light up their reflections, and said, with a
laugh of triumph: “Behold the millionaires!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
