<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="XVII" name="XVII"/>XVII</h2>
			<p>Three months had elapsed. Du Roy’s divorce had just been granted. His
wife had resumed the name of Forestier, and, as the Walters were to
leave on the 15th of July for Trouville, it was decided that he and they
should spend a day in the country together before they started. A
Thursday was selected, and they started at nine in the morning in a
large traveling landau with six places, drawn by four horses with
postilions. They were going to lunch at the Pavilion Henri-Quatre at
Saint Germain. Pretty-boy had asked to be the only man of the party, for
he could not endure the presence of the Marquis de Cazolles. But at the
last moment it was decided that the Count de Latour-Yvelin should be
called for on the way. He had been told the day before.</p>
			<p>The carriage passed up the Avenue of the Champs Elyseés at a swinging
trot, and then traversed the Bois de Boulogne. It was splendid summer
weather, not too warm. The swallows traced long sweeping lines across
the blue sky that one fancied one could still see after they had passed.
The three ladies occupied the back seat, the mother between her
daughters, and the men were with their backs to the horses, Walter
between the two guests. They crossed the Seine, skirted Mount Valerien,
and gained Bougival in order to follow the river as far as Le Pecq.</p>
			<p>The Count de Latour-Yvelin, a man advancing towards middle-age, with
long, light whiskers, gazed tenderly at Rose. They had been engaged for
a month. George, who was very pale, often looked at Susan, who was pale
too. Their eyes often met, and seemed to concert something, to
understand one another, to secretly exchange a thought, and then to flee
one another. Madame Walter was quiet and happy.</p>
			<p>The lunch was a long one. Before starting back for Paris, George
suggested a turn on the terrace. They stopped at first to admire the
view. All ranged themselves in a line along the parapet, and went into
ecstasies over the far-stretching horizon. The Seine at the foot of a
long hill flowed towards Maisons-Lafitte like an immense serpent
stretched in the herbage. To the right, on the summit of the slope, the
aqueduct of Marly showed against the skyline its outline, resembling
that of a gigantic, long-legged caterpillar, and Marly was lost beneath
it in a thick cluster of trees. On the immense plain extending in front
of them, villages could be seen dotted. The pieces of water at Le
Vesinet showed like clear spots amidst the thin foliage of the little
forest. To the left, away in the distance, the pointed steeple of
Sastrouville could be seen.</p>
			<p>Walter said: “Such a panorama is not to be found anywhere in the world.
There is not one to match it in Switzerland.”</p>
			<p>Then they began to walk on gently, to have a stroll and enjoy the
prospect. George and Susan remained behind. As soon as they were a few
paces off, he said to her in a low and restrained voice: “Susan, I adore
you. I love you to madness.”</p>
			<p>She murmured: “So do I you, Pretty-boy.”</p>
			<p>He went on: “If I do not have you for my wife, I shall leave Paris and
this country.”</p>
			<p>She replied: “Ask Papa for my hand. Perhaps he will consent.”</p>
			<p>He made a gesture of impatience. “No, I tell you for the twentieth time
that is useless. The door of your house would be closed to me. I should
be dismissed from the paper, and we should not be able even to see one
another. That is a pretty result, at which I am sure to arrive by a
formal demand for you. They have promised you to the Marquis de
Cazolles. They hope that you will end by saying ‘yes,’ and they are
waiting for that.”</p>
			<p>She asked: “What is to be done?”</p>
			<p>He hesitated, glancing at her, sidelong fashion. “Do you love me enough
to run a risk?”</p>
			<p>She answered resolutely: “Yes.”</p>
			<p>“A great risk?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“The greatest of risks?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Have you the courage to set your father and mother at defiance?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Really now?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Very well, there is one way and only one. The thing must come from you
and not from me. You are a spoilt child; they let you say whatever you
like, and they will not be too much astonished at an act of daring the
more on your part. Listen, then. This evening, on reaching home, you
must go to your mamma first, your mamma alone, and tell her you want to
marry me. She will be greatly moved and very angry⁠—”</p>
			<p>Susan interrupted him with: “Oh, mamma will agree.”</p>
			<p>He went on quickly: “No, you do not know her. She will be more vexed and
angrier than your father. You will see how she will refuse. But you must
be firm, you must not give way, you must repeat that you want to marry
me, and no one else. Will you do this?”</p>
			<p>“I will.”</p>
			<p>“On leaving your mother you must tell your father the same thing in a
very serious and decided manner.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes; and then?”</p>
			<p>“And then it is that matters become serious. If you are determined, very
determined⁠—very, very determined to be my wife, my dear, dear little
Susan⁠—I will⁠—run away with you.”</p>
			<p>She experienced a joyful shock, and almost clapped her hands. “Oh! how
delightful. You will run away with me. When will you run away with me?”</p>
			<p>All the old poetry of nocturnal elopements, post-chaises, country inns;
all the charming adventures told in books, flashed through her mind,
like an enchanting dream about to be realized. She repeated: “When will
you run away with me?”</p>
			<p>He replied, in low tones: “This evening⁠—to-night.”</p>
			<p>She asked, quivering: “And where shall we go to?”</p>
			<p>“That is my secret. Reflect on what you are doing. Remember that after
such a flight you can only be my wife. It is the only way, but is⁠—it is
very dangerous⁠—for you.”</p>
			<p>She declared: “I have made up my mind; where shall I rejoin you?”</p>
			<p>“Can you get out of the hotel alone?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. I know how to undo the little door.”</p>
			<p>“Well, when the doorkeeper has gone to bed, towards midnight, come and
meet me on the Place de la Concorde. You will find me in a cab drawn up
in front of the Ministry of Marine.”</p>
			<p>“I will come.”</p>
			<p>“Really?”</p>
			<p>“Really.”</p>
			<p>He took her hand and pressed it. “Oh! how I love you. How good and brave
you are! So you don’t want to marry Monsieur de Cazolles?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! no.”</p>
			<p>“Your father was very angry when you said no?”</p>
			<p>“I should think so. He wanted to send me back to the convent.”</p>
			<p>“You see that it is necessary to be energetic.”</p>
			<p>“I will be so.”</p>
			<p>She looked at the vast horizon, her head full of the idea of being ran
off with. She would go further than that with him. She would be ran away
with. She was proud of it. She scarcely thought of her reputation⁠—of
what shame might befall her. Was she aware of it? Did she even suspect
it?</p>
			<p>Madame Walter, turning round, exclaimed: “Come along, little one. What
are you doing with Pretty-boy?”</p>
			<p>They rejoined the others and spoke of the seaside, where they would soon
be. Then they returned home by way of Chatou, in order not to go over
the same road twice. George no longer spoke. He reflected. If the little
girl had a little courage, he was going to succeed at last. For three
months he had been enveloping her in the irresistible net of his love.
He was seducing, captivating, conquering her. He had made himself loved
by her, as he knew how to make himself loved. He had captured her
childish soul without difficulty. He had at first obtained of her that
she should refuse Monsieur de Cazolles. He had just obtained that she
would fly with him. For there was no other way. Madame Walter, he well
understood, would never agree to give him her daughter. She still loved
him; she would always love him with unmanageable violence. He restrained
her by his studied coldness; but he felt that she was eaten up by hungry
and impotent passion. He could never bend her. She would never allow him
to have Susan. But once he had the girl away he would deal on a level
footing with her father. Thinking of all this, he replied by broken
phrases to the remarks addressed to him, and which he did not hear. He
only seemed to come to himself when they returned to Paris.</p>
			<p>Susan, too, was thinking, and the bells of the four horses rang in her
ears, making her see endless miles of highway under eternal moonlight,
gloomy forests traversed, wayside inns, and the hurry of the hostlers to
change horses, for every one guesses that they are pursued.</p>
			<p>When the landau entered the court-yard of the mansion, they wanted to
keep George to dinner. He refused, and went home. After having eaten a
little, he went through his papers as if about to start on a long
journey. He burnt some compromising letters, hid others, and wrote to
some friends. From time to time he looked at the clock, thinking:
“Things must be getting warm there.” And a sense of uneasiness gnawed at
his heart. Suppose he was going to fail? But what could he fear? He
could always get out of it. Yet it was a big game he was playing that
evening.</p>
			<p>He went out towards eleven o’clock, wandered about some time, took a
cab, and had it drawn up in the Place de la Concorde, by the Ministry of
Marine. From time to time he struck a match to see the time by his
watch. When he saw midnight approaching, his impatience became feverish.
Every moment he thrust his head out of the window to look. A distant
clock struck twelve, then another nearer, then two together, then a last
one, very far away. When the latter had ceased to sound, he thought: “It
is all over. It is a failure. She won’t come.” He had made up his mind,
however, to wait till daylight. In these matters one must be patient.</p>
			<p>He heard the quarter strike, then the half-hour, then the quarter to,
and all the clocks repeated “one,” as they had announced midnight. He no
longer expected her; he was merely remaining, racking his brain to
divine what could have happened. All at once a woman’s head was passed
through the window, and asked: “Are you there, Pretty-boy?”</p>
			<p>He started, almost choked with emotion, “Is that you, Susan?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is I.”</p>
			<p>He could not manage to turn the handle quickly enough, and repeated:
“Ah! it is you, it is you; come inside.”</p>
			<p>She came in and fell against him. He said, “Go on,” to the driver, and
the cab started.</p>
			<p>She gasped, without saying a word.</p>
			<p>He asked: “Well, how did it go off?”</p>
			<p>She murmured, almost fainting: “Oh! it was terrible, above all with
mamma.”</p>
			<p>He was uneasy and quivering. “Your mamma. What did she say? Tell me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! it was awful. I went into her room and told her my little story
that I had carefully prepared. She grew pale, and then she cried:
‘Never, never.’ I cried, I grew angry. I vowed I would marry no one but
you. I thought that she was going to strike me. She went on just as if
she were mad; she declared that I should be sent back to the convent the
next day. I had never seen her like that⁠—never. Then papa came in,
hearing her shouting all her nonsense. He was not so angry as she was,
but he declared that you were not a good enough match. As they had put
me in a rage, too, I shouted louder than they did. And papa told me to
leave the room, with a melodramatic air that did not suit him at all.
This is what decided me to run off with you. Here I am. Where are we
going to?”</p>
			<p>He had passed his arm gently round her and was listening with all his
ears, his heart throbbing, and a ravenous hatred awakening within him
against these people. But he had got their daughter. They should just
see.</p>
			<p>He answered: “It is too late to catch a train, so this cab will take us
to Sevres, where we shall pass the night. To-morrow we shall start for
La Roche-Guyon. It is a pretty village on the banks of the Seine,
between Nantes and Bonnieres.”</p>
			<p>She murmured: “But I have no clothes. I have nothing.”</p>
			<p>He smiled carelessly: “Bah! we will arrange all that there.”</p>
			<p>The cab rolled along the street. George took one of the young girl’s
hands and began to kiss it slowly and with respect. He scarcely knew
what to say to her, being scarcely accustomed to platonic love-making.
But all at once he thought he noted that she was crying. He inquired,
with alarm: “What is the matter with you, darling?”</p>
			<p>She replied in tearful tones: “Poor mamma, she will not be able to sleep
if she has found out my departure.”</p>
			<p>Her mother, indeed, was not asleep.</p>
			<p>As soon as Susan had left the room, Madame Walter remained face to face
with her husband. She asked, bewildered and cast down: “Good heavens!
What is the meaning of this?”</p>
			<p>Walter exclaimed furiously: “It means that that schemer has bewitched
her. It is he who made her refuse Cazolles. He thinks her dowry worth
trying for.” He began to walk angrily up and down the room, and went
on: “You were always luring him here, too, yourself; you flattered him,
you cajoled him, you could not cosset him enough. It was Pretty-boy
here, Pretty-boy there, from morning till night, and this is the return
for it.”</p>
			<p>She murmured, livid: “I⁠—I lured him?”</p>
			<p>He shouted in her face: “Yes, you. You were all mad over him⁠—Madame de
Marelle, Susan, and the rest. Do you think I did not see that you could
not pass a couple of days without having him here?”</p>
			<p>She drew herself up tragically: “I will not allow you to speak to me
like that. You forget that I was not brought up like you, behind a
counter.”</p>
			<p>He stood for a moment stupefied, and then uttered a furious “Damn it
all!” and rushed out, slamming the door after him. As soon as she was
alone she went instinctively to the glass to see if anything was changed
in her, so impossible and monstrous did what had happened appear. Susan
in love with Pretty-boy, and Pretty-boy wanting to marry Susan! No, she
was mistaken; it was not true. The girl had had a very natural fancy for
this good-looking fellow; she had hoped that they would give him her for
a husband, and had made her little scene because she wanted to have her
own way. But he⁠—he could not be an accomplice in that. She reflected,
disturbed, as one in presence of great catastrophes. No, Pretty-boy
could know nothing of Susan’s prank.</p>
			<p>She thought for a long time over the possible innocence or perfidy of
this man. What a scoundrel, if he had prepared the blow! And what would
happen! What dangers and tortures she foresaw. If he knew nothing, all
could yet be arranged. They would travel about with Susan for six
months, and it would be all over. But how could she meet him herself
afterwards? For she still loved him. This passion had entered into her
being like those arrowheads that cannot be withdrawn. To live without
him was impossible. She might as well die.</p>
			<p>Her thoughts wandered amidst these agonies and uncertainties. A pain
began in her head; her ideas became painful and disturbed. She worried
herself by trying to work things out; grew mad at not knowing. She
looked at the clock; it was past one. She said to herself: “I cannot
remain like this, I shall go mad. I must know. I will wake up Susan and
question her.”</p>
			<p>She went barefooted, in order not to make a noise, and with a candle in
her hand, towards her daughter’s room. She opened the door softly, went
in, and looked at the bed. She did not comprehend matters at first, and
thought that the girl might still be arguing with her father. But all at
once a horrible suspicion crossed her mind, and she rushed to her
husband’s room. She reached it in a bound, blanched and panting. He was
in bed reading.</p>
			<p>He asked, startled: “Well, what is it? What is the matter with you?”</p>
			<p>She stammered: “Have you seen Susan?”</p>
			<p>“I? No. Why?”</p>
			<p>“She has⁠—she has⁠—gone! She is not in her room.”</p>
			<p>He sprang onto the carpet, thrust his feet into his slippers, and, with
his shirt tails floating in the air, rushed in turn to his daughter’s
room. As soon as he saw it, he no longer retained any doubt. She had
fled. He dropped into a chair and placed his lamp on the ground in
front of him.</p>
			<p>His wife had rejoined him, and stammered: “Well?”</p>
			<p>He had no longer the strength to reply; he was no longer enraged, he
only groaned: “It is done; he has got her. We are done for.”</p>
			<p>She did not understand, and said: “What do you mean? done for?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, by Jove! He will certainly marry her now.”</p>
			<p>She gave a cry like that of a wild beast: “He, never! You must be mad!”</p>
			<p>He replied, sadly: “It is no use howling. He has run away with her, he
has dishonored her. The best thing is to give her to him. By setting to
work in the right way no one will be aware of this escapade.”</p>
			<p>She repeated, shaken by terrible emotion: “Never, never; he shall never
have Susan. I will never consent.”</p>
			<p>Walter murmured, dejectedly: “But he has got her. It is done. And he
will keep her and hide her as long as we do not yield. So, to avoid
scandal, we must give in at once.”</p>
			<p>His wife, torn by pangs she could not acknowledge, repeated: “No, no, I
will never consent.”</p>
			<p>He said, growing impatient: “But there is no disputing about it. It must
be done. Ah, the rascal, how he has done us! He is a sharp one. All the
same, we might have made a far better choice as regards position, but
not as regards intelligence and prospects. He will be a deputy and a
minister.”</p>
			<p>Madame Walter declared, with savage energy: “I will never allow him to
marry Susan. You understand⁠—never.”</p>
			<p>He ended by getting angry and taking up, as a practical man, the cudgels
on behalf of Pretty-boy. “Hold your tongue,” said he. “I tell you again
that it must be so; it absolutely must. And who knows? Perhaps we shall
not regret it. With men of that stamp one never knows what may happen.
You saw how he overthrew in three articles that fool of a
Laroche-Mathieu, and how he did it with dignity, which was infernally
difficult in his position as the husband. At all events, we shall see.
It always comes to this, that we are nailed. We cannot get out of it.”</p>
			<p>She felt a longing to scream, to roll on the ground, to tear her hair
out. She said at length, in exasperated tones: “He shall not have her. I
won’t have it.”</p>
			<p>Walter rose, picked up his lamp, and remarked: “There, you are stupid,
just like all women. You never do anything except from passion. You do
not know how to bend yourself to circumstances. You are stupid. I will
tell you that he shall marry her. It must be.”</p>
			<p>He went out, shuffling along in his slippers. He traversed⁠—a comical
phantom in his nightshirt⁠—the broad corridor of the huge slumbering
house, and noiselessly re-entered his room.</p>
			<p>Madame Walter remained standing, torn by intolerable grief. She did not
yet quite understand it. She was only conscious of suffering. Then it
seemed to her that she could not remain there motionless till daylight.
She felt within her a violent necessity of fleeing, of running away, of
seeking help, of being succored. She sought whom she could summon to
her. What man? She could not find one. A priest; yes, a priest! She
would throw herself at his feet, acknowledge everything, confess her
fault and her despair. He would understand that this wretch must not
marry Susan, and would prevent it. She must have a priest at once. But
where could she find one? Whither could she go? Yet she could not remain
like that.</p>
			<p>Then there passed before her eyes, like a vision, the calm figure of
Jesus walking on the waters. She saw it as she saw it in the picture. So
he was calling her. He was saying: “Come to me; come and kneel at my
feet. I will console you, and inspire you with what should be done.”</p>
			<p>She took her candle, left the room, and went downstairs to the
conservatory. The picture of Jesus was right at the end of it in a small
drawing-room, shut off by a glass door, in order that the dampness of
the soil should not damage the canvas. It formed a kind of chapel in a
forest of strange trees. When Madame Walter entered the winter garden,
never having seen it before save full of light, she was struck by its
obscure profundity. The dense plants of the tropics made the atmosphere
thick with their heavy breath; and the doors no longer being open, the
air of this strange wood, enclosed beneath a glass roof, entered the
chest with difficulty; intoxicated, caused pleasure and pain, and
imparted a confused sensation of enervation, pleasure, and death. The
poor woman walked slowly, oppressed by the shadows, amidst which
appeared, by the flickering light of her candle, extravagant plants,
recalling monsters, living creatures, hideous deformities. All at once
she caught sight of the picture of Christ. She opened the door
separating her from it, and fell on her knees. She prayed to him,
wildly, at first, stammering forth words of true, passionate, and
despairing invocations. Then, the ardor of her appeal slackening, she
raised her eyes towards him, and was struck with anguish. He resembled
Pretty-boy so strongly, in the trembling light of this solitary candle,
lighting the picture from below, that it was no longer Christ⁠—it was
her lover who was looking at her. They were his eyes, his forehead, the
expression of his face, his cold and haughty air.</p>
			<p>She stammered: “Jesus, Jesus, Jesus!” and the name “George” rose to her
lips. All at once she thought that at that very moment, perhaps, George
had her daughter. He was alone with her somewhere. He with Susan! She
repeated: “Jesus, Jesus!” but she was thinking of them⁠—her daughter and
her lover. They were alone in a room, and at night. She saw them. She
saw them so plainly that they rose up before her in place of the
picture. They were smiling at one another. They were embracing. She rose
to go towards them, to take her daughter by the hair and tear her from
his clasp. She would seize her by the throat and strangle her, this
daughter whom she hated⁠—this daughter who was joining herself to this
man. She touched her; her hands encountered the canvas; she was pressing
the feet of Christ. She uttered a loud cry and fell on her back. Her
candle, overturned, went out.</p>
			<p>What took place then? She dreamed for a long time wild, frightful
dreams. George and Susan continually passed before her eyes, with Christ
blessing their horrible loves. She felt vaguely that she was not in her
room. She wished to rise and flee; she could not. A torpor had seized
upon her, which fettered her limbs, and only left her mind on the alert,
tortured by frightful and fantastic visions, lost in an unhealthy
dream⁠—the strange and sometimes fatal dream engendered in human minds
by the soporific plants of the tropics, with their strange and
oppressive perfumes.</p>
			<p>The next morning Madame Walter was found stretched out senseless, almost
asphyxiated before “Jesus Walking on the Waters.” She was so ill that
her life was feared for. She only fully recovered the use of her senses
the following day. Then she began to weep. The disappearance of Susan
was explained to the servants as due to her being suddenly sent back to
the convent. And Monsieur Walter replied to a long letter of Du Roy by
granting him his daughter’s hand.</p>
			<p>Pretty-boy had posted this letter at the moment of leaving Paris, for he
had prepared it in advance the evening of his departure. He said in it,
in respectful terms, that he had long loved the young girl; that there
had never been any agreement between them; but that finding her come
freely to him to say, “I wish to be your wife,” he considered himself
authorized in keeping her, even in hiding her, until he had obtained an
answer from her parents, whose legal power had for him less weight than
the wish of his betrothed. He demanded that Monsieur Walter should
reply, “post restante,” a friend being charged to forward the letter to
him.</p>
			<p>When he had obtained what he wished he brought back Susan to Paris, and
sent her on to her parents, abstaining himself from appearing for some
little time.</p>
			<p>They had spent six days on the banks of the Seine at La Roche-Guyon.</p>
			<p>The young girl had never enjoyed herself so much. She had played at
pastoral life. As he passed her off as his sister, they lived in a free
and chaste intimacy⁠—a kind of loving friendship. He thought it a clever
stroke to respect her. On the day after their arrival she had purchased
some linen and some country-girl’s clothes, and set to work fishing,
with a huge straw hat, ornamented with wild flowers, on her head. She
thought the country there delightful. There was an old tower and an old
chateau, in which beautiful tapestry was shown.</p>
			<p>George, dressed in a boating jersey, bought ready-made from a local
tradesman, escorted Susan, now on foot along the banks of the river, now
in a boat. They kissed at every moment, she in all innocence, and he
ready to succumb to temptation. But he was able to restrain himself; and
when he said to her, “We will go back to Paris to-morrow; your father
has granted me your hand,” she murmured simply, “Already? It was so nice
being your wife here.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
