<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="XV" name="XV"/>XV</h2>
			<p>The conquest of Morocco had been accomplished two months back. France,
mistress of Tangiers, held the whole of the African shore of the
Mediterranean as far as Tripoli, and had guaranteed the debt of the
newly annexed territory. It was said that two ministers had gained a
score of millions over the business, and Laroche-Mathieu was almost
openly named. As to Walter, no one in Paris was ignorant of the fact
that he had brought down two birds with one stone, and made thirty or
forty millions out of the loan and eight to ten millions out of the
copper and iron mines, as well as out of a large stretch of territory
bought for almost nothing prior to the conquest, and sold after the
French occupation to companies formed to promote colonization. He had
become in a few days one of the lords of creation, one of those
omnipotent financiers more powerful than monarchs who cause heads to
bow, mouths to stammer, and all that is base, cowardly, and envious, to
well up from the depths of the human heart. He was no longer the Jew
Walter, head of a shady bank, manager of a fishy paper, deputy suspected
of illicit jobbery. He was Monsieur Walter, the wealthy Israelite.</p>
			<p>He wished to show himself off. Aware of the monetary embarrassments of
the Prince de Carlsbourg, who owned one of the finest mansions in the
Rue de Faubourg, Saint Honoré, with a garden giving onto the Champs
Elysées, he proposed to him to buy house and furniture, without shifting
a stick, within twenty-four hours. He offered three millions, and the
prince, tempted by the amount, accepted. The following day Walter
installed himself in his new domicile. Then he had another idea, the
idea of a conqueror who wishes to conquer Paris, the idea of a
Bonaparte. The whole city was flocking at that moment to see a great
painting by the Hungarian artist, Karl Marcowitch, exhibited at a
dealer’s named Jacques Lenoble, and representing Christ walking on the
water. The art critics, filled with enthusiasm, declared the picture the
most superb masterpiece of the century. Walter bought it for four
hundred thousand francs, and took it away, thus cutting suddenly short a
flow of public curiosity, and forcing the whole of Paris to speak of him
in terms of envy, blame, or approbation. Then he had it announced in the
papers that he would invite everyone known in Parisian society to view
at his house some evening this triumph of the foreign master, in order
that it might not be said that he had hidden away a work of art. His
house would be open; let those who would, come. It would be enough to
show at the door the letter of invitation.</p>
			<p>This ran as follows: “Monsieur and Madame Walter beg of you to honor
them with your company on December 30th, between 9 and 12 p. m., to view
the picture by Karl Marcowitch, ‘Jesus Walking on the Waters,’ lit up by
electric light.” Then, as a postscript, in small letters: “Dancing after
midnight.” So those who wished to stay could, and out of these the
Walters would recruit their future acquaintances. The others would view
the picture, the mansion, and their owners with worldly curiosity,
insolent and indifferent, and would then go away as they came. But Daddy
Walter knew very well that they would return later on, as they had come
to his Israelite brethren grown rich like himself. The first thing was
that they should enter his house, all these titled paupers who were
mentioned in the papers, and they would enter it to see the face of a
man who had gained fifty millions in six weeks; they would enter it to
see and note who else came there; they would also enter it because he
had had the good taste and dexterity to summon them to admire a
Christian picture at the home of a child of Israel. He seemed to say to
them: “You see I have given five hundred thousand francs for the
religious masterpiece of Marcowitch, ‘Jesus Walking on the Waters.’ And
this masterpiece will always remain before my eyes in the house of the
Jew, Walter.”</p>
			<p>In society there had been a great deal of talk over these invitations,
which, after all, did not pledge one in any way. One could go there as
one went to see watercolors at Monsieur Petit’s. The Walters owned a
masterpiece, and threw open their doors one evening so that everyone
could admire it. Nothing could be better. The <i>Vie Francaise</i> for a
fortnight past had published every morning a note on this coming event
of the 30th December, and had striven to kindle public curiosity.</p>
			<p>Du Roy was furious at the governor’s triumph. He had thought himself
rich with the five hundred thousand francs extorted from his wife, and
now he held himself to be poor, fearfully poor, when comparing his
modest fortune with the shower of millions that had fallen around him,
without his being able to pick any of it up. His envious hatred waxed
daily. He was angry with everyone⁠—with the Walters, whom he had not
been to see at their new home; with his wife, who, deceived by
Laroche-Mathieu, had persuaded him not to invest in the Morocco loan;
and, above all, with the minister who had tricked him, who had made use
of him, and who dined at his table twice a week. George was his agent,
his secretary, his mouthpiece, and when he was writing from his
dictation felt wild longings to strangle this triumphant foe. As a
minister, Laroche-Mathieu had shown modesty in mien, and in order to
retain his portfolio, did not let it be seen that he was gorged with
gold. But Du Roy felt the presence of this gold in the haughtier tone of
the parvenu barrister, in his more insolent gestures, his more daring
affirmation, his perfect self-confidence. Laroche-Mathieu now reigned in
the Du Roy household, having taken the place and the days of the Count
de Vaudrec, and spoke to the servants like a second master. George
tolerated him with a quiver running through him like a dog who wants to
bite, and dares not. But he was often harsh and brutal towards
Madeleine, who shrugged her shoulders and treated him like a clumsy
child. She was, besides, astonished at his continual ill-humor, and
repeated: “I cannot make you out. You are always grumbling, and yet your
position is a splendid one.”</p>
			<p>He would turn his back without replying.</p>
			<p>He had declared at first that he would not go to the governor’s
entertainment, and that he would never more set foot in the house of
that dirty Jew. For two months Madame Walter had been writing to him
daily, begging him to come, to make an appointment with her whenever he
liked, in order, she said, that she might hand over the seventy thousand
francs she had gained for him. He did not reply, and threw these
despairing letters into the fire. Not that he had renounced receiving
his share of their profits, but he wanted to madden her, to treat her
with contempt, to trample her under feet. She was too rich. He wanted to
show his pride. The very day of the exhibition of the picture, as
Madeleine pointed out to him that he was very wrong not to go, he
replied: “Hold your tongue. I shall stay at home.”</p>
			<p>Then after dinner he suddenly said: “It will be better after all to
undergo this affliction. Get dressed at once.”</p>
			<p>She was expecting this, and said: “I will be ready in a quarter of an
hour.” He dressed growling, and even in the cab he continued to spit out
his spleen.</p>
			<p>The court-yard of the Carlsbourg mansion was lit up by four electric
lights, looking like four small bluish moons, one at each corner. A
splendid carpet was laid down the high flight of steps, on each of which
a footman in livery stood motionless as a statue.</p>
			<p>Du Roy muttered: “Here’s a fine show-off for you,” and shrugged his
shoulders, his heart contracted by jealousy.</p>
			<p>His wife said: “Be quiet and do likewise.”</p>
			<p>They went in and handed their heavy outer garments to the footmen who
advanced to meet them. Several ladies were also there with their
husbands, freeing themselves from their furs. Murmurs of: “It is very
beautiful, very beautiful,” could be heard. The immense entrance hall
was hung with tapestry, representing the adventures of Mars and Venus.
To the right and left were the two branches of a colossal double
staircase, which met on the first floor. The banisters were a marvel of
wrought-iron work, the dull old gilding of which glittered with discreet
luster beside the steps of pink marble. At the entrance to the
reception-rooms two little girls, one in a pink folly costume, and the
other in a blue one, offered a bouquet of flowers to each lady. This was
held to be charming.</p>
			<p>The reception-rooms were already crowded. Most of the ladies were in
outdoor dress, showing that they came there as to any other exhibition.
Those who intended remaining for the ball were bare armed and bare
necked. Madame Walter, surrounded by her friends, was in the second room
acknowledging the greetings of the visitors. Many of these did not know
her, and walked about as though in a museum, without troubling
themselves about the masters of the house.</p>
			<p>When she perceived Du Roy she grew livid, and made a movement as though
to advance towards him. Then she remained motionless, awaiting him. He
greeted her ceremoniously, while Madeleine overwhelmed her with
affection and compliments. Then George left his wife with her and lost
himself in the crowd, to listen to the spiteful things that assuredly
must be said.</p>
			<p>Five reception-rooms opened one into the other, hung with costly stuffs,
Italian embroideries, or oriental rugs of varying shades and styles, and
bearing on their walls pictures by old masters. People stopped, above
all, to admire a small room in the Louis XVI style, a kind of boudoir,
lined with silk, with bouquets of roses on a pale blue ground. The
furniture, of gilt wood, upholstered in the same material, was admirably
finished.</p>
			<p>George recognized some well-known people⁠—the Duchess de Ferraciné, the
Count and Countess de Ravenal, General Prince d’Andremont, the beautiful
Marchioness des Dunes, and all those folk who are seen at first
performances. He was suddenly seized by the arm, and a young and pleased
voice murmured in his ear: “Ah! here you are at last, you naughty
Pretty-boy. How is it one no longer sees you?”</p>
			<p>It was Susan Walter, scanning him with her enamel-like eyes from beneath
the curly cloud of her fair hair. He was delighted to see her again, and
frankly pressed her hand. Then, excusing himself, he said: “I have not
been able to come. I have had so much to do during the past two months
that I have not been out at all.”</p>
			<p>She said, with her serious air: “That is wrong, very wrong. You have
caused us a great deal of pain, for we adore you, mamma and I. As to
myself, I cannot get on without you. When you are not here I am bored
to death. You see I tell you so plainly, so that you may no longer have
the right of disappearing like that. Give me your arm, I will show you
‘Jesus Walking on the Waters’ myself; it is right away at the end,
beyond the conservatory. Papa had it put there so that they should be
obliged to see everything before they could get to it. It is astonishing
how he is showing off this place.”</p>
			<p>They went on quietly among the crowd. People turned round to look at
this good-looking fellow and this charming little doll. A well-known
painter said: “What a pretty pair. They go capitally together.”</p>
			<p>George thought: “If I had been really clever, this is the girl I should
have married. It was possible. How is it I did not think of it? How did
I come to take that other one? What a piece of stupidity. We always act
too impetuously, and never reflect sufficiently.”</p>
			<p>And envy, bitter envy, sank drop by drop into his mind like a gall,
embittering all his pleasures, and rendering existence hateful.</p>
			<p>Susan was saying: “Oh! do come often, Pretty-boy; we will go in for all
manner of things now, papa is so rich. We will amuse ourselves like
madcaps.”</p>
			<p>He answered, still following up his idea: “Oh! you will marry now. You
will marry some prince, a ruined one, and we shall scarcely see one
another.”</p>
			<p>She exclaimed, frankly: “Oh! no, not yet. I want someone who pleases me,
who pleases me a great deal, who pleases me altogether. I am rich enough
for two.”</p>
			<p>He smiled with a haughty and ironical smile, and began to point out to
her people that were passing, very noble folk who had sold their rusty
titles to the daughters of financiers like herself, and who now lived
with or away from their wives, but free, impudent, known, and respected.
He concluded with: “I will not give you six months before you are caught
with that same bait. You will be a marchioness, a duchess or a princess,
and will look down on me from a very great height, miss.”</p>
			<p>She grew indignant, tapped him on the arm with her fan, and vowed that
she would marry according to the dictates of her heart.</p>
			<p>He sneered: “We shall see about all that, you are too rich.”</p>
			<p>She remarked: “But you, too, have come in for an inheritance.”</p>
			<p>He uttered in a tone of contempt: “Oh! not worth speaking about.
Scarcely twenty thousand francs a year, not much in these days.”</p>
			<p>“But your wife has also inherited.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. A million between us. Forty thousand francs’ income. We cannot
even keep a carriage on it.”</p>
			<p>They had reached the last of the reception-rooms, and before them lay
the conservatory⁠—a huge winter garden full of tall, tropical trees,
sheltering clumps of rare flowers. Penetrating beneath this somber
greenery, through which the light streamed like a flood of silver, they
breathed the warm odor of damp earth, and an air heavy with perfumes. It
was a strange sensation, at once sweet, unwholesome, and pleasant, of a
nature that was artificial, soft, and enervating. They walked on carpets
exactly like moss, between two thick clumps of shrubs. All at once Du
Roy noticed on his left, under a wide dome of palms, a broad basin of
white marble, large enough to bathe in, and on the edge of which four
large Delft swans poured forth water through their open beaks. The
bottom of the basin was strewn with golden sand, and swimming about in
it were some enormous goldfish, quaint Chinese monsters, with projecting
eyes and scales edged with blue, mandarins of the waters, who recalled,
thus suspended above this gold-colored ground, the embroideries of the
Flowery Land. The journalist halted with beating heart. He said to
himself: “Here is luxury. These are the houses in which one ought to
live. Others have arrived at it. Why should not I?”</p>
			<p>He thought of means of doing so; did not find them at once, and grew
irritated at his powerlessness. His companion, somewhat thoughtful, did
not speak. He looked at her in sidelong fashion, and again thought: “To
marry this little puppet would suffice.”</p>
			<p>But Susan all at once seemed to wake up. “Attention!” said she; and
pushing George through a group which barred their way, she made him turn
sharply to the right.</p>
			<p>In the midst of a thicket of strange plants, which extended in the air
their quivering leaves, opening like hands with slender fingers, was
seen the motionless figure of a man standing on the sea. The effect was
surprising. The picture, the sides of which were hidden in the moving
foliage, seemed a black spot upon a fantastic and striking horizon. It
had to be carefully looked at in order to understand it. The frame cut
the center of the ship in which were the apostles, scarcely lit up by
the oblique rays from a lantern, the full light of which one of them,
seated on the bulwarks, was casting upon the approaching Savior. Jesus
was advancing with his foot upon a wave, which flattened itself
submissively and caressingly beneath the divine tread. All was dark
about him. Only the stars shone in the sky. The faces of the apostles,
in the vague light of the lantern, seemed convulsed with surprise. It
was a wonderful and unexpected work of a master; one of those works
which agitate the mind and give you something to dream of for years.
People who look at such things at the outset remain silent, and then go
thoughtfully away, and only speak later on of the worth of the painting.
Du Roy, having contemplated it for some time, said: “It is nice to be
able to afford such trifles.”</p>
			<p>But as he was pushed against by others coming to see it, he went away,
still keeping on his arm Susan’s little hand, which he squeezed
slightly. She said: “Would you like a glass of champagne? Come to the
refreshment buffet. We shall find papa there.”</p>
			<p>And they slowly passed back through the saloons, in which the crowd was
increasing, noisy and at home, the fashionable crowd of a public fête.
George all at once thought he heard a voice say: “It is Laroche-Mathieu
and Madame Du Roy.” These words flitted past his ear like those distant
sounds borne by the wind. Whence came they? He looked about on all
sides, and indeed saw his wife passing by on the minister’s arm. They
were chatting intimately in a low tone, smiling, and with their eyes
fixed on one another’s. He fancied he noticed that people whispered as
they looked at them, and he felt within him a stupid and brutal desire
to spring upon them, these two creatures, and smite them down. She was
making him ridiculous. He thought of Forestier. Perhaps they were
saying: “That cuckold Du Roy.” Who was she? A little parvenu sharp
enough, but really not over-gifted with parts. People visited him
because they feared him, because they felt his strength, but they must
speak in unrestrained fashion of this little journalistic household. He
would never make any great way with this woman, who would always render
his home a suspected one, who would always compromise herself, whose
very bearing betrayed the woman of intrigue. She would now be a cannon
ball riveted to his ankle. Ah! if he had only known, if he had only
guessed. What a bigger game he would have played. What a fine match he
might have won with this little Susan for stakes. How was it he had been
blind enough not to understand that?</p>
			<p>They reached the dining-room⁠—an immense apartment, with marble columns,
and walls hung with old tapestry. Walter perceived his descriptive
writer, and darted forward to take him by the hands. He was intoxicated
with joy. “Have you seen everything? Have you shown him everything,
Susan? What a lot of people, eh, Pretty-boy! Did you see the Prince de
Guerche? He came and drank a glass of punch here just now,” he
exclaimed.</p>
			<p>Then he darted towards the Senator Rissolin, who was towing along his
wife, bewildered, and bedecked like a stall at a fair. A gentleman bowed
to Susan, a tall, thin fellow, slightly bald, with yellow whiskers, and
that air of good breeding which is everywhere recognizable. George heard
his name mentioned, the Marquis de Cazolles, and became suddenly jealous
of him. How long had she known him? Since her accession to wealth, no
doubt. He divined a suitor.</p>
			<p>He was taken by the arm. It was Norbert de Varenne. The old poet was
airing his long hair and worn dress-coat with a weary and indifferent
air. “This is what they call amusing themselves,” said he. “By and by
they will dance, and then they will go bed, and the little girls will be
delighted. Have some champagne. It is capital.”</p>
			<p>He had a glass filled for himself, and bowing to Du Roy, who had taken
another, said: “I drink to the triumph of wit over wealth.” Then he
added softly: “Not that wealth on the part of others hurts me; or that I
am angry at it. But I protest on principle.”</p>
			<p>George no longer listened to him. He was looking for Susan, who had just
disappeared with the Marquis de Cazolles, and abruptly quitting Norbert
de Varenne, set out in pursuit of the young girl. A dense crowd in quest
of refreshments checked him. When he at length made his way through it,
he found himself face to face with the de Marelles. He was still in the
habit of meeting the wife, but he had not for some time past met the
husband, who seized both his hands, saying: “How can I thank you, my
dear fellow, for the advice you gave me through Clotilde. I have gained
close on a hundred thousand francs over the Morocco loan. It is to you I
owe them. You are a valuable friend.”</p>
			<p>Several men turned round to look at the pretty and elegant brunette. Du
Roy replied: “In exchange for that service, my dear fellow, I am going
to take your wife, or rather to offer her my arm. Husband and wife are
best apart, you know.”</p>
			<p>Monsieur de Marelle bowed, saying: “You are quite right. If I lose you,
we will meet here in an hour.”</p>
			<p>“Exactly.”</p>
			<p>The pair plunged into the crowd, followed by the husband. Clotilde kept
saying: “How lucky these Walters are! That is what it is to have
business intelligence.”</p>
			<p>George replied: “Bah! Clever men always make a position one way or
another.”</p>
			<p>She said: “Here are two girls who will have from twenty to thirty
millions apiece. Without reckoning that Susan is pretty.”</p>
			<p>He said nothing. His own idea, coming from another’s mouth, irritated
him. She had not yet seen the picture of “Jesus Walking on the Water,”
and he proposed to take her to it. They amused themselves by talking
scandal of the people they recognized, and making fun of those they did
not. Saint-Potin passed by, bearing on the lapel of his coat a number of
decorations, which greatly amused them. An ex-ambassador following him
showed far fewer.</p>
			<p>Du Roy remarked: “What a mixed salad of society.”</p>
			<p>Boisrenard, who shook hands with him, had also adorned his buttonhole
with the green and yellow ribbon worn on the day of the duel. The
Viscountess de Percemur, fat and bedecked, was chatting with a duke in
the little Louis XVI boudoir.</p>
			<p>George whispered: “An amorous <i>tête-à-tête</i>.”</p>
			<p>But on passing through the greenhouse, he noticed his wife seated beside
Laroche-Mathieu, both almost hidden behind a clump of plants. They
seemed to be asserting: “We have appointed a meeting here, a meeting in
public. For we do not care a rap what people think.”</p>
			<p>Madame de Marelle agreed that the Jesus of Karl Marcowitch was
astounding, and they retraced their steps. They had lost her husband.
George inquired: “And Laurine, is she still angry with me?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, still so as much as ever. She refuses to see you, and walks away
when you are spoken of.”</p>
			<p>He did not reply. The sudden enmity of this little girl vexed and
oppressed him. Susan seized on them as they passed through a doorway,
exclaiming: “Ah! here you are. Well, Pretty-boy, you must remain alone.
I am going to take away Clotilde to show her my room.”</p>
			<p>The two moved rapidly away, gliding through the throng with that
undulating snake-like motion women know how to adopt in a crowd. Almost
immediately a voice murmured: “George.”</p>
			<p>It was Madame Walter, who went on in a low tone: “Oh! how ferociously
cruel you are. How you do make me suffer without reason. I told Susan to
get your companion away in order to be able to say a word to you.
Listen, I must speak to you this evening, I must, or you don’t know what
I will do. Go into the conservatory. You will find a door on the left
leading into the garden. Follow the path in front of it. At the end of
it you will find an arbor. Wait for me there in ten minutes’ time. If
you won’t, I declare to you that I will create a scene here at once.”</p>
			<p>He replied loftily: “Very well. I will be at the spot you mention within
ten minutes.”</p>
			<p>And they separated. But Jacques Rival almost made him behindhand. He had
taken him by the arm and was telling him a lot of things in a very
excited manner. He had no doubt come from the refreshment buffet. At
length Du Roy left him in the hands of Monsieur de Marelle, whom he had
come across, and bolted. He still had to take precautions not to be seen
by his wife or Laroche-Mathieu. He succeeded, for they seemed deeply
interested in something, and found himself in the garden. The cold air
struck him like an ice bath. He thought: “Confound it, I shall catch
cold,” and tied his pocket-handkerchief round his neck. Then he slowly
went along the walk, seeing his way with difficulty after coming out of
the bright light of the reception-rooms. He could distinguish to the
right and left leafless shrubs, the branches of which were quivering.
Light filtered through their branches, coming from the windows of the
mansion. He saw something white in the middle of the path in front of
him, and Madame Walter, with bare arms and bosom, said in a quivering
voice; “Ah here you are; you want to kill me, then?”</p>
			<p>He answered quickly: “No melodramatics, I beg of you, or I shall bolt at
once.”</p>
			<p>She had seized him round the neck, and with her lips close to his, said:
“But what have I done to you? You are behaving towards me like a wretch.
What have I done to you?”</p>
			<p>He tried to repulse her. “You wound your hair round every one of my
buttons the last time I saw you, and it almost brought about a rupture
between my wife and myself.”</p>
			<p>She was surprised for a moment, and then, shaking her head, said: “Oh!
your wife would not mind. It was one of your mistresses who had made a
scene over it.”</p>
			<p>“I have no mistresses.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense. But why do you no longer ever come to see me? Why do you
refuse to come to dinner, even once a week, with me? What I suffer is
fearful. I love you to that degree that I no longer have a thought that
is not for you; that I see you continually before my eyes; that I can no
longer say a word without being afraid of uttering your name. You cannot
understand that, I know. It seems to me that I am seized in some one’s
clutches, tied up in a sack, I don’t know what. Your remembrance, always
with me, clutches my throat, tears my chest, breaks my legs so as to no
longer leave me strength to walk. And I remain like an animal sitting
all day on a chair thinking of you.”</p>
			<p>He looked at her with astonishment. She was no longer the big frolicsome
tomboy he had known, but a bewildered despairing woman, capable of
anything. A vague project, however, arose in his mind. He replied: “My
dear, love is not eternal. We take and we leave one another. But when it
drags on, as between us two, it becomes a terrible drag. I will have no
more of it. That is the truth. However, if you can be reasonable, and
receive and treat me as a friend, I will come as I used to. Do you feel
capable of that?”</p>
			<p>She placed her two bare arms on George’s coat, and murmured: “I am
capable of anything in order to see you.”</p>
			<p>“Then it is agreed on,” said he; “we are friends, and nothing more.”</p>
			<p>She stammered: “It is agreed on;” and then, holding out her lips to him:
“One more kiss; the last.”</p>
			<p>He refused gently, saying: “No, we must keep to our agreement.”</p>
			<p>She turned aside, wiping away a couple of tears, and then, drawing from
her bosom a bundle of papers tied with pink silk ribbon, offered it to
Du Roy, saying: “Here; it is your share of the profit in the Morocco
affair. I was so pleased to have gained it for you. Here, take it.”</p>
			<p>He wanted to refuse, observing: “No, I will not take that money.”</p>
			<p>Then she grew indignant. “Ah! so you won’t take it now. It is yours,
yours, only. If you do not take it, I will throw it into the gutter. You
won’t act like that, George?”</p>
			<p>He received the little bundle, and slipped it into his pocket.</p>
			<p>“We must go in,” said he, “you will catch cold.”</p>
			<p>She murmured: “So much the better, if I could die.”</p>
			<p>She took one of his hands, kissed it passionately, with rage and
despair, and fled towards the mansion. He returned, quietly reflecting.
Then he re-entered the conservatory with haughty forehead and smiling
lip. His wife and Laroche-Mathieu were no longer there. The crowd was
thinning. It was becoming evident that they would not stay for the
dance. He perceived Susan arm-in-arm with her sister. They both came
towards him to ask him to dance the first quadrille with the Count de
Latour Yvelin.</p>
			<p>He was astonished, and asked: “Who is he, too?”</p>
			<p>Susan answered maliciously: “A new friend of my sister’s.” Rose blushed,
and murmured: “You are very spiteful, Susan; he is no more my friend
than yours.”</p>
			<p>Susan smiled, saying: “Oh! I know all about it.”</p>
			<p>Rose annoyed, turned her back on them and went away. Du Roy familiarly
took the elbow of the young girl left standing beside him, and said in
his caressing voice: “Listen, my dear, you believe me to be your
friend?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Pretty-boy.”</p>
			<p>“You have confidence in me?” “Quite.”</p>
			<p>“You remember what I said to you just now?”</p>
			<p>“What about?”</p>
			<p>“About your marriage, or rather about the man you are going to marry.”
“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Well, then, you will promise me one thing?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; but what is it?”</p>
			<p>“To consult me every time that your hand is asked for, and not to accept
anyone without taking my advice.”</p>
			<p>“Very well.”</p>
			<p>“And to keep this a secret between us two. Not a word of it to your
father or your mother.”</p>
			<p>“Not a word.”</p>
			<p>“It is a promise, then?” “It is a promise.”</p>
			<p>Rival came up with a bustling air. “Mademoiselle, your papa wants you
for the dance.”</p>
			<p>She said: “Come along, Pretty-boy.”</p>
			<p>But he refused, having made up his mind to leave at once, wishing to be
alone in order to think. Too many new ideas had entered his mind, and he
began to look for his wife. In a short time he saw her drinking
chocolate at the buffet with two gentlemen unknown to him. She
introduced her husband without mentioning their names to him. After a
few moments, he said, “Shall we go?”</p>
			<p>“When you like.”</p>
			<p>She took his arm, and they walked back through the reception-rooms, in
which the public were growing few. She said: “Where is Madame Walter, I
should like to wish her good-bye?”</p>
			<p>“It is better not to. She would try to keep us for the ball, and I have
had enough of this.”</p>
			<p>“That is so, you are quite right.”</p>
			<p>All the way home they were silent. But as soon as they were in their
room Madeleine said smilingly, before even taking off her veil. “I have
a surprise for you.”</p>
			<p>He growled ill-temperedly: “What is it?”</p>
			<p>“Guess.” “I will make no such effort.”</p>
			<p>“Well, the day after to-morrow is the first of January.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“The time for New Year’s gifts.”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Here’s one for you that Laroche-Mathieu gave me just now.”</p>
			<p>She gave him a little black box resembling a jewel-case. He opened it
indifferently, and saw the cross of the Legion of Honor. He grew
somewhat pale, then smiled, and said: “I should have preferred ten
millions. That did not cost him much.”</p>
			<p>She had expected an outburst of joy, and was irritated at this coolness.
“You are really incredible. Nothing satisfies you now,” said she.</p>
			<p>He replied, tranquilly: “That man is only paying his debt, and he still
owes me a great deal.”</p>
			<p>She was astonished at his tone, and resumed: “It is though, a big thing
at your age.”</p>
			<p>He remarked: “All things are relative. I could have something bigger
now.”</p>
			<p>He had taken the case, and placing it on the mantel-shelf, looked for
some moments at the glittering star it contained. Then he closed it and
went to bed, shrugging his shoulders.</p>
			<p>The <i>Journal Officiel</i> of the first of January announced the nomination
of Monsieur Prosper George Du Roy, journalist, to the dignity of
chevalier of the Legion of Honor, for special services. The name was
written in two words, which gave George more pleasure than the
derivation itself.</p>
			<p>An hour after having read this piece of news he received a note from
Madame Walter begging him to come and dine with her that evening with
his wife, to celebrate his new honors. He hesitated for a few moments,
and then throwing this note, written in ambiguous terms, into the fire,
said to Madeleine:</p>
			<p>“We are going to dinner at the Walter’s this evening.”</p>
			<p>She was astonished. “Why, I thought you never wanted to set foot in the
house again.”</p>
			<p>He only remarked: “I have changed my mind.”</p>
			<p>When they arrived Madame Walter was alone in the little Louis XVI.
boudoir she had adopted for the reception of personal friends. Dressed
in black, she had powdered her hair, which rendered her charming. She
had the air at a distance of an old woman, and close at hand, of a young
one, and when one looked at her well, of a pretty snare for the eyes.</p>
			<p>“You are in mourning?” inquired Madeleine.</p>
			<p>She replied, sadly: “Yes, and no. I have not lost any relative. But I
have reached the age when one wears the mourning of one’s life. I wear
it to-day to inaugurate it. In future I shall wear it in my heart.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy thought: “Will this resolution hold good?”</p>
			<p>The dinner was somewhat dull. Susan alone chattered incessantly. Rose
seemed preoccupied. The journalist was warmly congratulated. During the
evening they strolled chatting through the saloons and the conservatory.
As Du Roy was walking in the rear with Madame Walter, she checked him by
the arm.</p>
			<p>“Listen,” said she, in a low voice, “I will never speak to you of
anything again, never. But come and see me, George. It is impossible for
me to live without you, impossible. It is indescribable torture. I feel
you, I cherish you before my eyes, in my heart, all day and all night.
It is as though you had caused me to drink a poison which was eating me
away within. I cannot bear it, no, I cannot bear it. I am willing to be
nothing but an old woman for you. I have made my hair white to show you
so, but come here, only come here from time to time as a friend.”</p>
			<p>She had taken his hand and was squeezing it, crushing it, burying her
nails in his flesh.</p>
			<p>He answered, quietly: “It is understood, then. It is useless to speak of
all that again. You see I came to-day at once on receiving your letter.”</p>
			<p>Walter, who had walked on in advance with his two daughters and
Madeleine, was waiting for Du Roy beside the picture of “Jesus Walking
on the Waters.”</p>
			<p>“Fancy,” said he, laughing, “I found my wife yesterday on her knees
before this picture, as if in a chapel. She was paying her devotions.
How I did laugh.”</p>
			<p>Madame Walter replied in a firm voice⁠—a voice thrilling with secret
exultation: “It is that Christ who will save my soul. He gives me
strength and courage every time I look at Him.” And pausing in front of
the Divinity standing amidst the waters, she murmured: “How handsome he
is. How afraid of Him those men are, and yet how they love Him. Look at
His head, His eyes⁠—how simple yet how supernatural at the same time.”</p>
			<p>Susan exclaimed, “But He resembles you, Pretty-boy. I am sure He
resembles you. If you had a beard, or if He was clean shaven, you would
be both alike. Oh, but it is striking!”</p>
			<p>She insisted on his standing beside the picture, and they all, indeed,
recognized that the two faces resembled one another. Everyone was
astonished. Walter thought it very singular. Madeleine, smiling,
declared that Jesus had a more manly air. Madame Walter stood
motionless, gazing fixedly at the face of her lover beside the face of
Christ, and had become as white as her hair.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
