<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="XII" name="XII"/>XII</h2>
			<p>The Place de la Trinité lay, almost deserted, under a dazzling July sun.
An oppressive heat was crushing Paris. It was as though the upper air,
scorched and deadened, had fallen upon the city⁠—a thick, burning air
that pained the chests inhaling it. The fountains in front of the church
fell lazily. They seemed weary of flowing, tired out, limp, too; and the
water of the basins, in which leaves and bits of paper were floating,
looked greenish, thick and glaucous. A dog having jumped over the stone
rim, was bathing in the dubious fluid. A few people, seated on the
benches of the little circular garden skirting the front of the church,
watched the animal curiously.</p>
			<p>Du Roy pulled out his watch. It was only three o’clock. He was half an
hour too soon. He laughed as he thought of this appointment. “Churches
serve for anything as far as she is concerned,” said he to himself.
“They console her for having married a Jew, enable her to assume an
attitude of protestation in the world of politics and a respectable one
in that of fashion, and serve as a shelter to her gallant rendezvous. So
much for the habit of making use of religion as an umbrella. If it is
fine it is a walking stick; if sunshiny, a parasol; if it rains, a
shelter; and if one does not go out, why, one leaves it in the hall. And
there are hundreds like that who care for God about as much as a cherry
stone, but who will not hear him spoken against. If it were suggested to
them to go to a hotel, they would think it infamous, but it seems to
them quite simple to make love at the foot of the altar.”</p>
			<p>He walked slowly along the edge of the fountain, and then again looked
at the church clock, which was two minutes faster than his watch. It was
five minutes past three. He thought that he would be more comfortable
inside, and entered the church. The coolness of a cellar assailed him,
he breathed it with pleasure, and then took a turn round the nave to
reconnoiter the place. Other regular footsteps, sometimes halting and
then beginning anew, replied from the further end of the vast pile to
the sound of his own, which rang sonorously beneath the vaulted roof. A
curiosity to know who this other promenader was seized him. It was a
stout, bald-headed gentleman who was strolling about with his nose in
the air, and his hat behind his back. Here and there an old woman was
praying, her face hidden in her hands. A sensation of solitude and rest
stole over the mind. The light, softened by the stained-glass windows,
was refreshing to the eyes. Du Roy thought that it was “deucedly
comfortable” inside there.</p>
			<p>He returned towards the door and again looked at his watch. It was still
only a quarter-past three. He sat down at the entrance to the main
aisle, regretting that one could not smoke a cigarette. The slow
footsteps of the stout gentleman could still be heard at the further end
of the church, near the choir.</p>
			<p>Someone came in, and George turned sharply round. It was a poor woman in
a woolen skirt, who fell on her knees close to the first chair, and
remained motionless, with clasped hands, her eyes turned to heaven, her
soul absorbed in prayer. Du Roy watched her with interest, asking
himself what grief, what pain, what despair could have crushed her
heart. She was worn out by poverty, it was plain. She had, perhaps, too,
a husband who was beating her to death, or a dying child. He murmured
mentally: “Poor creatures. How some of them do suffer.” Anger rose up in
him against pitiless Nature. Then he reflected that these poor wretches
believed, at any rate, that they were taken into consideration up above,
and that they were duly entered in the registers of heaven with a debtor
and creditor balance. Up above! And Du Roy, whom the silence of the
church inclined to sweeping reflections, judging creation at a bound,
muttered contemptuously: “What bosh all that sort of thing is!”</p>
			<p>The rustle of a dress made him start. It was she.</p>
			<p>He rose, and advanced quickly. She did not hold out her hand, but
murmured in a low voice: “I have only a few moments. I must get back
home. Kneel down near me, so that we may not be noticed.” And she
advanced up the aisle, seeking a safe and suitable spot, like a woman
well acquainted with the place. Her face was hidden by a thick veil, and
she walked with careful footsteps that could scarcely be heard.</p>
			<p>When she reached the choir she turned, and muttered, in that mysterious
tone of voice we always assume in church: “The side aisles will be
better. We are too much in view here.”</p>
			<p>She bowed low to the high altar, turned to the right, and returned a
little way towards the entrance; then, making up her mind, she took a
chair and knelt down. George took possession of the next one to her, and
as soon as they were in an attitude of prayer, began: “Thanks; oh,
thanks; I adore you! I should like to be always telling you so, to tell
you how I began to love you, how I was captivated the first time I saw
you. Will you allow me some day to open my heart to tell you all this?”</p>
			<p>She listened to him in an attitude of deep meditation, as if she heard
nothing. She replied between her fingers: “I am mad to allow you to
speak to me like this, mad to have come here, mad to do what I am doing,
mad to let you believe that⁠—that⁠—this adventure can have any issue.
Forget all this; you must, and never speak to me again of it.”</p>
			<p>She paused. He strove to find an answer, decisive and passionate words,
but not being able to join action to words, was partially paralyzed. He
replied: “I expect nothing, I hope for nothing. I love you. Whatever you
may do, I will repeat it to you so often, with such power and ardor,
that you will end by understanding it. I want to make my love penetrate
you, to pour it into your soul, word by word, hour by hour, day by day,
so that at length it impregnates you like a liquid, falling drop by
drop; softens you, mollifies you, and obliges you later on to reply to
me: ‘I love you, too.’ ”</p>
			<p>He felt her shoulder trembling against him and her bosom throbbing, and
she stammered, abruptly: “I love you, too!”</p>
			<p>He started as though he had received a blow, and sighed: “Good God.”</p>
			<p>She replied, in panting tones: “Ought I to have told you that? I feel I
am guilty and contemptible. I, who have two daughters, but I cannot help
it, I cannot help it. I could not have believed, I should never have
thought⁠—but it is stronger than I. Listen, listen: I have never loved
anyone but you; I swear it. And I have loved you for a year past in
secret, in my secret heart. Oh! I have suffered and struggled till I can
do so no more. I love you.”</p>
			<p>She was weeping, with her hands crossed in front of her face, and her
whole frame was quivering, shaken by the violence of her emotion.</p>
			<p>George murmured: “Give me your hand, that I may touch it, that I may
press it.”</p>
			<p>She slowly withdrew her hand from her face. He saw her cheek quite wet
and a tear ready to fall on her lashes. He had taken her hand and was
pressing it, saying: “Oh, how I should like to drink your tears!”</p>
			<p>She said, in a low and broken voice, which resembled a moan: “Do not
take advantage of me; I am lost.”</p>
			<p>He felt an impulse to smile. How could he take advantage of her in that
place? He placed the hand he held upon his heart, saying: “Do you feel
it beat?” For he had come to the end of his passionate phrases.</p>
			<p>For some moments past the regular footsteps of the promenader had been
coming nearer. He had gone the round of the altars, and was now, for the
second time at least, coming down the little aisle on the right. When
Madame Walter heard him close to the pillar which hid her, she snatched
her fingers from George’s grasp, and again hid her face. And both
remained motionless, kneeling as though they had been addressing fervent
supplications to heaven together. The stout gentleman passed close to
them, cast an indifferent look upon them, and walked away to the lower
end of the church, still holding his hat behind his back.</p>
			<p>Du Roy, who was thinking of obtaining an appointment elsewhere than at
the Church of the Trinity, murmured: “Where shall I see you to-morrow?”</p>
			<p>She did not answer. She seemed lifeless⁠—turned into a statue of prayer.
He went on: “To-morrow, will you let me meet you in the Parc Monseau?”</p>
			<p>She turned towards him her again uncovered face, a livid face,
contracted by fearful suffering, and in a jerky voice ejaculated: “Leave
me, leave me now; go away, go away, only for five minutes! I suffer too
much beside you. I want to pray, and I cannot. Go away, let me pray
alone for five minutes. I cannot. Let me implore God to pardon me⁠—to
save me. Leave me for five minutes.”</p>
			<p>Her face was so upset, so full of pain, that he rose without saying a
word, and then, after a little hesitation, asked: “Shall I come back
presently?”</p>
			<p>She gave a nod, which meant, “Yes, presently,” and he walked away
towards the choir. Then she strove to pray. She made a superhuman effort
to invoke the Deity, and with quivering frame and bewildering soul
appealed for mercy to heaven. She closed her eyes with rage, in order no
longer to see him who just left her. She sought to drive him from her
mind, she struggled against him, but instead of the celestial apparition
awaited in the distress of her heart, she still perceived the young
fellow’s curly moustache. For a year past she had been struggling thus
every day, every night, against the growing possession, against this
image which haunted her dreams, haunted her flesh, and disturbed her
nights. She felt caught like a beast in a net, bound, thrown into the
arms of this man, who had vanquished, conquered her, simply by the hair
on his lip and the color of his eyes. And now in this church, close to
God, she felt still weaker, more abandoned, and more lost than at home.
She could no longer pray, she could only think of him. She suffered
already that he had quitted her. She struggled, however, despairingly,
resisted, implored help with all the strength of her soul. She would
liked to have died rather than fall thus, she who had never faltered in
her duty. She murmured wild words of supplication, but she was listening
to George’s footsteps dying away in the distance.</p>
			<p>She understood that it was all over, that the struggle was a useless
one. She would not yield, however; and she was seized by one of those
nervous crises that hurl women quivering, yelling, and writhing on the
ground. She trembled in every limb, feeling that she was going to fall
and roll among the chairs, uttering shrill cries. Someone approached
with rapid steps. It was a priest. She rose and rushed towards him,
holding out her clasped hands, and stammering: “Oh! save me, save me!”</p>
			<p>He halted in surprise, saying: “What is it you wish, madame?”</p>
			<p>“I want you to save me. Have pity on me. If you do not come to my
assistance, I am lost.”</p>
			<p>He looked at her, asking himself whether she was not mad, and then said:
“What can I do for you?”</p>
			<p>He was a tall, and somewhat stout young man, with full, pendulous
cheeks, dark, with a carefully shaven face, a good-looking city curate
belonging to a wealthy district, and accustomed to rich penitents.</p>
			<p>“Hear my confession, and advise me, sustain me, tell me what I am to
do.”</p>
			<p>He replied: “I hear confessions every Saturday, from three to six
o’clock.”</p>
			<p>Having seized his arm, she gripped it tightly as she repeated: “No, no,
no; at once, at once! You must. He is here, in the church. He is waiting
for me.”</p>
			<p>“Who is waiting for you?” asked the priest.</p>
			<p>“A man who will ruin me, who will carry me off, if you do not save me.
I cannot flee from him. I am too weak⁠—too weak! Oh, so weak, so weak!”
She fell at his feet sobbing: “Oh, have pity on me, father! Save me, in
God’s name, save me!”</p>
			<p>She held him by his black gown lest he should escape, and he with
uneasiness glanced around, lest some malevolent or devout eye should see
this woman fallen at his feet. Understanding at length that he could not
escape, he said: “Get up; I have the key of the confessional with me.”</p>
			<p>And fumbling in his pocket he drew out a ring full of keys, selected
one, and walked rapidly towards the little wooden cabin, dust holes of
the soul into which believers cast their sins. He entered the center
door, which he closed behind him, and Madame Walter, throwing herself
into the narrow recess at the side, stammered fervently, with a
passionate burst of hope: “Bless me father, for I have sinned.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy, having taken a turn round the choir, was passing down the left
aisle. He had got half-way when he met the stout, bald gentleman still
walking quietly along, and said to himself: “What the deuce is that
customer doing here?”</p>
			<p>The promenader had also slackened his pace, and was looking at George
with an evident wish to speak to him. When he came quite close he bowed,
and said in a polite fashion: “I beg your pardon, sir, for troubling
you, but can you tell me when this church was built?”</p>
			<p>Du Roy replied: “Really, I am not quite certain. I think within the last
twenty or five-and-twenty years. It is, besides, the first time I ever
was inside it.”</p>
			<p>“It is the same with me. I have never seen it.”</p>
			<p>The journalist, whose interest was awakened, remarked: “It seems to me
that you are going over it very carefully. You are studying it in
detail.”</p>
			<p>The other replied, with resignation: “I am not examining it; I am
waiting for my wife, who made an appointment with me here, and who is
very much behind time.” Then, after a few moments’ silence, he added:
“It is fearfully hot outside.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy looked at him, and all at once fancied that he resembled
Forestier.</p>
			<p>“You are from the country?” said he, inquiringly.</p>
			<p>“Yes, from Rennes. And you, sir, is it out of curiosity that you entered
this church?”</p>
			<p>“No, I am expecting a lady,” and bowing, the journalist walked away,
with a smile on his lips.</p>
			<p>Approaching the main entrance, he saw the poor woman still on her knees,
and still praying. He thought: “By Jove! she keeps hard at it.” He was
no longer moved, and no longer pitied her.</p>
			<p>He passed on, and began quietly to walk up the right-hand aisle to find
Madame Walter again. He marked the place where he had left her from a
distance, astonished at not seeing her. He thought he had made a mistake
in the pillar; went on as far as the end one, and then returned. She had
gone, then. He was surprised and enraged. Then he thought she might be
looking for him, and made the circuit of the church again. Not finding
her, he returned, and sat down on the chair she had occupied, hoping she
would rejoin him there, and waited. Soon a low murmur of voices aroused
his attention. He had not seen anyone in that part of the church. Whence
came this whispering? He rose to see, and perceived in the adjacent
chapel the doors of the confessional. The skirt of a dress issuing from
one of these trailed on the pavement. He approached to examine the
woman. He recognized her. She was confessing.</p>
			<p>He felt a violent inclination to take her by the shoulders and to pull
her out of the box. Then he thought: “Bah! it is the priest’s turn now;
it will be mine to-morrow.” And he sat down quietly in front of the
confessional, biding his time, and chuckling now over the adventure. He
waited a long time. At length Madame Walter rose, turned round, saw him,
and came up to him. Her expression was cold and severe, “Sir,” said she,
“I beg of you not to accompany me, not to follow me, and not to come to
my house alone. You will not be received. Farewell.”</p>
			<p>And she walked away with a dignified bearing. He let her depart, for one
of his principles was never to force matters. Then, as the priest,
somewhat upset, issued in turn from his box, he walked up to him, and,
looking him straight in the eyes, growled to his face: “If you did not
wear a petticoat, what a smack you would get across your ugly chops.”
After which he turned on his heels and went out of the church, whistling
between his teeth. Standing under the porch, the stout gentleman, with
the hat on his head and his hands behind his back, tired of waiting, was
scanning the broad squares and all the streets opening onto it. As Du
Roy passed him they bowed to one another.</p>
			<p>The journalist, finding himself at liberty, went to the office of the
<i>Vie Francaise</i>. As soon as he entered he saw by the busy air of the
messengers that something out of the common was happening, and at once
went into the manager’s room. Daddy Walter, in a state of nervous
excitement, was standing up dictating an article in broken sentences;
issuing orders to the reporters, who surrounded him, between two
paragraphs; giving instructions to Boisrenard; and opening letters.</p>
			<p>As Du Roy came in, the governor uttered a cry of joy: “Ah! how lucky;
here is Pretty-boy!” He stopped short, somewhat confused, and excused
himself: “I beg your pardon for speaking like that, but I am very much
disturbed by certain events. And then I hear my wife and daughter
speaking of you as Pretty-boy from morning till night, and have ended by
falling into the habit myself. You are not offended?”</p>
			<p>“Not at all!” said George, laughingly; “there is nothing in that
nickname to displease me.”</p>
			<p>Daddy Walter went on: “Very well, then, I christen you Pretty-boy, like
everyone else. Well, the fact is, great things are taking place. The
Ministry has been overthrown by a vote of three hundred and ten to a
hundred and two. Our prorogation is again postponed⁠—postponed to the
Greek calends, and here we are at the twenty-eighth of July. Spain is
angry about the Morocco business, and it is that which has overthrown
Durand de l’Aine and his following. We are right in the swim. Marrot is
entrusted with the formation of a new Cabinet. He takes General Boutin
d’Acre as minister of war, and our friend Laroche-Mathieu for foreign
affairs. We are going to become an official organ. I am writing a
leader, a simple declaration of our principles, pointing out the line to
be followed by the Ministry.” The old boy smiled, and continued: “The
line they intend following, be it understood. But I want something
interesting about Morocco; an actuality; a sensational article;
something or other. Find one for me.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy reflected for a moment, and then replied: “I have the very thing
for you. I will give you a study of the political situation of the whole
of our African colony, with Tunis on the left, Algeria in the middle,
and Morocco on the right; the history of the races inhabiting this vast
extent of territory; and the narrative of an excursion on the frontier
of Morocco to the great oasis of Figuig, where no European has
penetrated, and which is the cause of the present conflict. Will that
suit you?”</p>
			<p>“Admirably!” exclaimed Daddy Walter. “And the title?”</p>
			<p>“From Tunis to Tangiers.”</p>
			<p>“Splendid!”</p>
			<p>Du Roy went off to search the files of the <i>Vie Francaise</i> for his first
article, “The Recollections of a Chasseur d’Afrique,” which, rebaptized,
touched up, and modified, would do admirably, since it dealt with
colonial policy, the Algerian population, and an excursion in the
province of Oran. In three-quarters of an hour it was rewritten, touched
up, and brought to date, with a flavor of realism, and praises of the
new Cabinet. The manager, having read the article, said: “It is capital,
capital, capital! You are an invaluable fellow. I congratulate you.”</p>
			<p>And Du Roy went home to dinner delighted with his day’s work, despite
the check at the Church of the Trinity, for he felt the battle won. His
wife was anxiously waiting for him. She exclaimed, as soon as she saw
him: “Do you know that Laroche-Mathieu is Minister for Foreign Affairs?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I have just written an article on Algeria, in connection with
it.”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“You know, the first we wrote together, ‘The Recollections of a Chasseur
d’Afrique,’ revised and corrected for the occasion.”</p>
			<p>She smiled, saying: “Ah, that is very good!” Then, after a few moments’
reflection, she continued: “I was thinking⁠—that continuation you were
to have written then, and that you⁠—put off. We might set to work on it
now. It would make a nice series, and very appropriate to the
situation.”</p>
			<p>He replied, sitting down to table: “Exactly, and there is nothing in the
way of it now that cuckold of a Forestier is dead.”</p>
			<p>She said quietly, in a dry and hurt tone: “That joke is more than out of
place, and I beg of you to put an end to it. It has lasted too long
already.”</p>
			<p>He was about to make an ironical answer, when a telegram was brought
him, containing these words: “I had lost my senses. Forgive me, and come
at four o’clock to-morrow to the Parc Monceau.”</p>
			<p>He understood, and with heart suddenly filled with joy, he said to his
wife, as he slipped the message into his pocket: “I will not do so any
more, darling; it was stupid, I admit.”</p>
			<p>And he began his dinner. While eating he kept repeating to himself the
words: “I had lost my senses. Forgive me, and come at four o’clock
to-morrow to the Parc Monceau.” So she was yielding. That meant: “I
surrender, I am yours when you like and where you like.” He began to
laugh, and Madeleine asked: “What is it?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” he answered; “I was thinking of a priest I met just now, and
who had a very comical mug.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy arrived to the time at the appointed place next day. On the
benches of the park were seated citizens overcome by heat, and careless
nurses, who seemed to be dreaming while their children were rolling on
the gravel of the paths. He found Madame Walter in the little antique
ruins from which a spring flows. She was walking round the little circle
of columns with an uneasy and unhappy air. As soon as he had greeted
her, she exclaimed: “What a number of people there are in the garden.”</p>
			<p>He seized the opportunity: “It is true; will you come somewhere else?”</p>
			<p>“But where?”</p>
			<p>“No matter where; in a cab, for instance. You can draw down the blind on
your side, and you will be quite invisible.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I prefer that; here I am dying with fear.”</p>
			<p>“Well, come and meet me in five minutes at the gate opening onto the
outer boulevard. I will have a cab.”</p>
			<p>And he darted off.</p>
			<p>As soon as she had rejoined him, and had carefully drawn down the blind
on her side, she asked: “Where have you told the driver to take us?”</p>
			<p>George replied: “Do not trouble yourself, he knows what to do.”</p>
			<p>He had given the man his address in the Rue de Constantinople.</p>
			<p>She resumed: “You cannot imagine what I suffer on account of you, how I
am tortured and tormented. Yesterday, in the church, I was cruel, but I
wanted to flee from you at any cost. I was so afraid to find myself
alone with you. Have you forgiven me?”</p>
			<p>He squeezed her hands: “Yes, yes, what would I not forgive you, loving
you as I do?”</p>
			<p>She looked at him with a supplicating air: “Listen, you must promise to
respect me⁠—not to⁠—not to⁠—otherwise I cannot see you again.”</p>
			<p>He did not reply at once; he wore under his moustache that keen smile
that disturbed women. He ended by murmuring: “I am your slave.”</p>
			<p>Then she began to tell him how she had perceived that she was in love
with him on learning that he was going to marry Madeleine Forestier. She
gave details, little details of dates and the like. Suddenly she paused.
The cab had stopped. Du Roy opened the door.</p>
			<p>“Where are we?” she asked.</p>
			<p>“Get out and come into this house,” he replied. “We shall be more at
ease there.”</p>
			<p>“But where are we?”</p>
			<p>“At my rooms,” and here we will leave them to their <i>tête-à-tête</i>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
