<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="XVI" name="XVI"/>XVI</h2>
			<p>During the remainder of the winter the Du Roys often visited the
Walters. George even dined there by himself continually, Madeleine
saying she was tired, and preferring to remain at home. He had adopted
Friday as a fixed day, and Madame Walter never invited anyone that
evening; it belonged to Pretty-boy, to him alone. After dinner they
played cards, and fed the goldfish, amusing themselves like a family
circle. Several times behind a door or a clump of shrubs in the
conservatory, Madame Walter had suddenly clasped George in her arms, and
pressing him with all her strength to her breast, had whispered in his
ear, “I love you, I love you till it is killing me.” But he had always
coldly repulsed her, replying, in a dry tone: “If you begin that
business once again, I shall not come here any more.”</p>
			<p>Towards the end of March the marriage of the two sisters was all at once
spoken about. Rose, it was said, was to marry the Count de
Latour-Yvelin, and Susan the Marquis de Cazolles. These two gentlemen
had become familiars of the household, those familiars to whom special
favors and marked privileges are granted. George and Susan continued to
live in a species of free and fraternal intimacy, romping for hours,
making fun of everyone, and seeming greatly to enjoy one another’s
company. They had never spoken again of the possible marriage of the
young girl, nor of the suitors who offered themselves.</p>
			<p>The governor had brought George home to lunch one morning. Madame Walter
was called away immediately after the repast to see one of the
tradesmen, and the young fellow said to Susan: “Let us go and feed the
goldfish.”</p>
			<p>They each took a piece of crumb of bread from the table and went into
the conservatory. All along the marble brim cushions were left lying on
the ground, so that one could kneel down round the basin, so as to be
nearer the fish. They each took one of these, side by side, and bending
over the water, began to throw in pellets of bread rolled between the
fingers. The fish, as soon as they caught sight of them, flocked round,
wagging their tails, waving their fins, rolling their great projecting
eyes, turning round, diving to catch the bait as it sank, and coming up
at once to ask for more. They had a funny action of the mouth, sudden
and rapid movements, a strangely monstrous appearance, and against the
sand of the bottom stood out a bright red, passing like flames through
the transparent water, or showing, as soon as they halted, the blue
edging to their scales. George and Susan saw their own faces looking up
in the water, and smiled at them. All at once he said in a low voice:
“It is not kind to hide things from me, Susan.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean, Pretty-boy?” asked she.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you remember, what you promised me here on the evening of the
fête?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“To consult me every time your hand was asked for.”</p>
			<p>“Well?”</p>
			<p>“Well, it has been asked for.”</p>
			<p>“By whom?”</p>
			<p>“You know very well.”</p>
			<p>“No. I swear to you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you do. That great fop, the Marquis de Cazolles.”</p>
			<p>“He is not a fop, in the first place.”</p>
			<p>“It may be so, but he is stupid, ruined by play, and worn out by
dissipation. It is really a nice match for you, so pretty, so fresh, and
so intelligent.”</p>
			<p>She inquired, smiling: “What have you against him?”</p>
			<p>“I, nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you have. He is not all that you say.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense. He is a fool and an intriguer.”</p>
			<p>She turned round somewhat, leaving off looking into the water, and said:
“Come, what is the matter with you?”</p>
			<p>He said, as though a secret was being wrenched from the bottom of his
heart: “I⁠—I⁠—am jealous of him.”</p>
			<p>She was slightly astonished, saying: “You?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I.”</p>
			<p>“Why so?”</p>
			<p>“Because I am in love with you, and you know it very well, you naughty
girl.”</p>
			<p>She said, in a severe tone: “You are mad, Pretty-boy.”</p>
			<p>He replied; “I know very well that I am mad. Ought I to have admitted
that⁠—I, a married man, to you, a young girl? I am more than mad, I am
guilty. I have no possible hope, and the thought of that drives me out
of my senses. And when I hear it said that you are going to be married,
I have fits of rage enough to kill someone. You must forgive me this,
Susan.”</p>
			<p>He was silent. The whole of the fish, to whom bread was no longer being
thrown, were motionless, drawn up in line like English soldiers, and
looking at the bent heads of those two who were no longer troubling
themselves about them. The young girl murmured, half sadly, half gayly:
“It is a pity that you are married. What would you? Nothing can be done.
It is settled.”</p>
			<p>He turned suddenly towards her, and said right in her face: “If I were
free, would you marry me?”</p>
			<p>She replied, in a tone of sincerity: “Yes, Pretty-boy, I would marry
you, for you please me far better than any of the others.”</p>
			<p>He rose, and stammered: “Thanks, thanks; do not say ‘yes’ to anyone yet,
I beg of you; wait a little longer, I entreat you. Will you promise me
this much?”</p>
			<p>She murmured, somewhat uneasily, and without understanding what he
wanted: “Yes, I promise you.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy threw the lump of bread he still held in his hand into the water,
and fled as though he had lost his head, without wishing her good-bye.
All the fish rushed eagerly at this lump of crumb, which floated, not
having been kneaded in the fingers, and nibbled it with greedy mouths.
They dragged it away to the other end of the basin, and forming a moving
cluster, a kind of animated and twisting flower, a live flower fallen
into the water head downwards.</p>
			<p>Susan, surprised and uneasy, got up and returned slowly to the
dining-room. The journalist had left.</p>
			<p>He came home very calm, and as Madeleine was writing letters, said to
her: “Are you going to dine at the Walters’ on Friday? I am going.”</p>
			<p>She hesitated, and replied: “No. I do not feel very well. I would rather
stay at home.”</p>
			<p>He remarked: “Just as you like.”</p>
			<p>Then he took his hat and went out again at once. For some time past he
had been keeping watch over her, following her about, knowing all her
movements. The hour he had been awaiting was at length at hand. He had
not been deceived by the tone in which she had said: “I would rather
stay at home.”</p>
			<p>He was very amiable towards her during the next few days. He even
appeared lively, which was not usual, and she said: “You are growing
quite nice again.”</p>
			<p>He dressed early on the Friday, in order to make some calls before going
to the governor’s, he said. He started just before six, after kissing
his wife, and went and took a cab at the Place Notre Dame de Lorette. He
said to the driver: “Pull up in front of No. 17, Rue Fontaine, and stay
there till I tell you to go on again. Then drive to the Cock Pheasant
restaurant in the Rue Lafayette.”</p>
			<p>The cab started at a slow trot, and Du Roy drew down the blinds. As soon
as he was opposite the door he did not take his eyes off it. After
waiting ten minutes he saw Madeleine come out and go in the direction of
the outer boulevards. As soon as she had got far enough off he put his
head through the window, and said to the driver: “Go on.” The cab
started again, and landed him in front of the Cock Pheasant, a
well-known middle-class restaurant. George went into the main
dining-room and ate slowly, looking at his watch from time to time. At
half-past seven, when he had finished his coffee, drank two liqueurs of
brandy, and slowly smoked a good cigar, he went out, hailed another cab
that was going by empty, and was driven to the Rue La Rochefoucauld. He
ascended without making any inquiry of the doorkeeper, to the third
story of the house he had told the man to drive to, and when a servant
opened the door to him, said: “Monsieur Guibert de Lorme is at home, is
he not?”</p>
			<p>“Yes sir.”</p>
			<p>He was ushered into the drawing-room, where he waited for a few minutes.
Then a gentleman came in, tall, and with a military bearing, gray-haired
though still young, and wearing the ribbon of the Legion of Honor. Du
Roy bowed, and said: “As I foresaw, Mr. Commissionary, my wife is now
dining with her lover in the furnished rooms they have hired in the Rue
des Martyrs.”</p>
			<p>The commissary of police bowed, saying: “I am at your service, sir.”</p>
			<p>George continued: “You have until nine o’clock, have you not? That limit
of time passed, you can no longer enter a private dwelling to prove
adultery.”</p>
			<p>“No, sir; seven o’clock in winter, nine o’clock from the 31st March. It
is the 5th of April, so we have till nine o’clock.</p>
			<p>“Very well, Mr. Commissionary, I have a cab downstairs; we can take the
officers who will accompany you, and wait a little before the door. The
later we arrive the best chance we have of catching them in the act.”</p>
			<p>“As you like, sir.”</p>
			<p>The commissary left the room, and then returned with an overcoat, hiding
his tri-colored sash. He drew back to let Du Roy pass out first. But the
journalist, who was preoccupied, declined to do so, and kept saying:
“After you, sir, after you.”</p>
			<p>The commissary said: “Go first, sir, I am at home.”</p>
			<p>George bowed, and passed out. They went first to the police office to
pick up three officers in plain clothes who were awaiting them, for
George had given notice during the day that the surprise would take
place that evening. One of the men got on the box beside the driver. The
other two entered the cab, which reached the Rue des Martyrs. Du Roy
said: “I have a plan of the rooms. They are on the second floor. We
shall first find a little ante-room, then a dining-room, then the
bedroom. The three rooms open into one another. There is no way out to
facilitate flight. There is a locksmith a little further on. He is
holding himself in readiness to be called upon by you.”</p>
			<p>When they arrived opposite the house it was only a quarter past eight,
and they waited in silence for more than twenty minutes. But when he
saw the three quarters about to strike, George said: “Let us start now.”</p>
			<p>They went up the stairs without troubling themselves about the
doorkeeper, who, indeed, did not notice them. One of the officers
remained in the street to keep watch on the front door. The four men
stopped at the second floor, and George put his ear to the door and then
looked through the keyhole. He neither heard nor saw anything. He rang
the bell.</p>
			<p>The commissary said to the officers: “You will remain in readiness till
called on.”</p>
			<p>And they waited. At the end of two or three minutes George again pulled
the bell several times in succession. They noted a noise from the
further end of the rooms, and then a slight step approached. Someone was
coming to spy who was there. The journalist then rapped smartly on the
panel of the door. A voice, a woman’s voice, that an attempt was
evidently being made to disguise asked: “Who is there?”</p>
			<p>The commissary replied: “Open, in the name of the law.”</p>
			<p>The voice repeated: “Who are you?”</p>
			<p>“I am the commissary of police. Open the door, or I will have it broken
in.”</p>
			<p>The voice went on: “What do you want?”</p>
			<p>Du Roy said: “It is I. It is useless to seek to escape.”</p>
			<p>The light steps, the tread of bare feet, was heard to withdraw, and then
in a few seconds to return.</p>
			<p>George said: “If you won’t open, we will break in the door.”</p>
			<p>He grasped the handle, and pushed slowly with his shoulder. As there
was no longer any reply, he suddenly gave such a violent and vigorous
shock that the old lock gave way. The screws were torn out of the wood,
and he almost fell over Madeleine, who was standing in the ante-room,
clad in a chemise and petticoat, her hair down, her legs bare, and a
candle in her hand.</p>
			<p>He exclaimed: “It is she, we have them,” and darted forward into the
rooms. The commissary, having taken off his hat, followed him, and the
startled woman came after, lighting the way. They crossed a
drawing-room, the uncleaned table of which displayed the remnants of a
repast⁠—empty champagne bottles, an open pot of fatted goose liver, the
body of a fowl, and some half-eaten bits of bread. Two plates piled on
the sideboard were piled with oyster shells.</p>
			<p>The bedroom seemed disordered, as though by a struggle. A dress was
thrown over a chair, a pair of trousers hung astride the arm of another.
Four boots, two large and two small, lay on their sides at the foot of
the bed. It was the room of a house let out in furnished lodgings, with
commonplace furniture, filled with that hateful and sickening smell of
all such places, the odor of all the people who had slept or lived there
a day or six months. A plate of cakes, a bottle of chartreuse, and two
liqueur glasses, still half full, encumbered the mantel-shelf. The upper
part of the bronze clock was hidden by a man’s hat.</p>
			<p>The commissary turned round sharply, and looking Madeleine straight in
the face, said: “You are Madame Claire Madeleine Du Roy, wife of
Monsieur Prosper George Du Roy, journalist, here present?”</p>
			<p>She uttered in a choking voice: “Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“What are you doing here?” She did not answer.</p>
			<p>The commissary went on: “What are you doing here? I find you away from
home, almost undressed, in furnished apartments. What did you come here
for?” He waited for a few moments. Then, as she still remained silent,
he continued: “Since you will not confess, madame, I shall be obliged to
verify the state of things.”</p>
			<p>In the bed could be seen the outline of a form hidden beneath the
clothes. The commissary approached and said: “Sir.”</p>
			<p>The man in bed did not stir. He seemed to have his back turned, and his
head buried under a pillow. The commissary touched what seemed to be his
shoulder, and said: “Sir, do not, I beg of you, force me to take
action.”</p>
			<p>But the form still remained as motionless as a corpse. Du Roy, who had
advanced quickly, seized the bed-clothes, pulled them down, and tearing
away the pillow, revealed the pale face of Monsieur Laroche-Mathieu. He
bent over him, and, quivering with the desire to seize him by the throat
and strangle him, said, between his clenched teeth: “Have at least the
courage of your infamy.”</p>
			<p>The commissary again asked: “Who are you?”</p>
			<p>The bewildered lover not replying, he continued: “I am a commissary of
police, and I summon you to tell me your name.”</p>
			<p>George, who was quivering with brutal wrath, shouted: “Answer, you
coward, or I will tell your name myself.”</p>
			<p>Then the man in the bed stammered: “Mr. Commissary, you ought not to
allow me to be insulted by this person. Is it with you or with him that
I have to do? Is it to you or to him that I have to answer?”</p>
			<p>His mouth seemed to be dried up as he spoke.</p>
			<p>The commissary replied: “With me, sir; with me alone. I ask you who you
are?”</p>
			<p>The other was silent. He held the sheet close up to his neck, and rolled
his startled eyes. His little, curled-up moustache showed up black upon
his blanched face.</p>
			<p>The commissary continued: “You will not answer, eh? Then I shall be
forced to arrest you. In any case, get up. I will question you when you
are dressed.”</p>
			<p>The body wriggled in the bed, and the head murmured: “But I cannot,
before you.”</p>
			<p>The commissary asked: “Why not?”</p>
			<p>The other stammered: “Because I am⁠—I am⁠—quite naked.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy began to chuckle sneeringly, and picking up a shirt that had
fallen onto the floor, threw it onto the bed, exclaiming: “Come, get up.
Since you have undressed in my wife’s presence, you can very well dress
in mine.”</p>
			<p>Then he turned his back, and returned towards the fireplace. Madeleine
had recovered all her coolness, and seeing that all was lost, was ready
to dare anything. Her eyes glittered with bravado, and twisting up a
piece of paper she lit, as though for a reception, the ten candles in
the ugly candelabra, placed at the corners of the mantel-shelf. Then,
leaning against this, and holding out backwards to the dying fire one of
her bare feet which she lifted up behind the petticoat, scarcely
sticking to her hips, she took a cigarette from a pink paper case, lit
it, and began to smoke. The commissary had returned towards her, pending
that her accomplice got up.</p>
			<p>She inquired insolently: “Do you often have such jobs as these, sir?”</p>
			<p>He replied gravely: “As seldom as possible, madame.”</p>
			<p>She smiled in his face, saying: “I congratulate you; it is dirty work.”</p>
			<p>She affected not to look at or even to see her husband.</p>
			<p>But the gentleman in the bed was dressing. He had put on his trousers,
pulled on his boots, and now approached putting on his waistcoat. The
commissary turned towards him, saying: “Now, sir, will you tell me who
you are?”</p>
			<p>He made no reply, and the official said: “I find myself obliged to
arrest you.”</p>
			<p>Then the man exclaimed suddenly: “Do not lay hands on me. My person is
inviolable.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy darted towards him as though to throw him down, and growled in
his face: “Caught in the act, in the act. I can have you arrested if I
choose; yes, I can.” Then, in a ringing tone, he added: “This man is
Laroche-Mathieu, Minister of Foreign Affairs.”</p>
			<p>The commissary drew back, stupefied, and stammered: “Really, sir, will
you tell me who you are?”</p>
			<p>The other had made up his mind, and said in forcible tones: “For once
that scoundrel has not lied. I am, indeed, Laroche-Mathieu, the
minister.” Then, holding out his hand towards George’s chest, in which a
little bit of red ribbon showed itself, he added: “And that rascal wears
on his coat the cross of honor which I gave him.”</p>
			<p>Du Roy had become livid. With a rapid movement he tore the bit of ribbon
from his buttonhole, and, throwing it into the fireplace, exclaimed:
“That is all that is fit for a decoration coming from a swine like
you.”</p>
			<p>They were quite close, face to face, exasperated, their fists clenched,
the one lean, with a flowing moustache, the other stout, with a twisted
one. The commissary stepped rapidly between the pair, and pushing them
apart with his hands, observed: “Gentlemen, you are forgetting
yourselves; you are lacking in self-respect.”</p>
			<p>They became quiet and turned on their heels. Madeleine, motionless, was
still smoking in silence.</p>
			<p>The police official resumed: “Sir, I have found you alone with Madame Du
Roy here, you in bed, she almost naked, with your clothes scattered
about the room. This is legal evidence of adultery. You cannot deny this
evidence. What have you to say for yourself?”</p>
			<p>Laroche-Mathieu murmured: “I have nothing to say; do your duty.”</p>
			<p>The commissary addressed himself to Madeleine: “Do you admit, madame,
that this gentleman is your lover?”</p>
			<p>She said with a certain swagger: “I do not deny it; he is my lover.”</p>
			<p>“That is enough.”</p>
			<p>The commissary made some notes as to the condition and arrangement of
the rooms. As he was finishing writing, the minister, who had finished
dressing, and was waiting with his greatcoat over his arm and his hat in
his hand, said: “Have you still need of me, sir? What am I to do? Can I
withdraw?”</p>
			<p>Du Roy turned towards him, and smiling insolently, said: “Why so? We
have finished. You can go to bed again, sir; we will leave you alone.”
And placing a finger on the official’s arm, he continued: “Let us
retire, Mr. Commissary, we have nothing more to do in this place.”</p>
			<p>Somewhat surprised, the commissary followed, but on the threshold of the
room George stopped to allow him to pass. The other declined, out of
politeness. Du Roy persisted, saying: “Pass first, sir.”</p>
			<p>“After you, sir,” replied the commissary.</p>
			<p>The journalist bowed, and in a tone of ironical politeness, said: “It is
your turn, sir; I am almost at home here.”</p>
			<p>Then he softly reclosed the door with an air of discretion.</p>
			<p>An hour later George Du Roy entered the offices of the <i>Vie Francaise</i>.
Monsieur Walter was already there, for he continued to manage and
supervise with solicitude his paper, which had enormously increased in
circulation, and greatly helped the schemes of his bank. The manager
raised his head and said: “Ah! here you are. You look very strange. Why
did you not come to dinner with us? What have you been up to?”</p>
			<p>The young fellow, sure of his effect, said, emphasizing every word: “I
have just upset the Minister of Foreign Affairs.”</p>
			<p>The other thought he was joking, and said: “Upset what?”</p>
			<p>“I am going to turn out the Cabinet. That is all. It is quite time to
get rid of that rubbish.”</p>
			<p>The old man thought that his leader-writer must be drunk. He murmured:
“Come, you are talking nonsense.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all. I have just caught Monsieur Laroche-Mathieu committing
adultery with my wife. The commissary of police has verified the fact.
The minister is done for.”</p>
			<p>Walter, amazed, pushed his spectacles right back on his forehead, and
said: “You are not joking?”</p>
			<p>“Not at all. I am even going to write an article on it.”</p>
			<p>“But what do you want to do?”</p>
			<p>“To upset that scoundrel, that wretch, that open evil-doer.” George
placed his hat on an armchair, and added: “Woe to those who cross my
path. I never forgive.”</p>
			<p>The manager still hesitated at understanding matters. He murmured:
“But⁠—your wife?”</p>
			<p>“My application for a divorce will be lodged to-morrow morning. I shall
send her back to the departed Forestier.”</p>
			<p>“You mean to get a divorce?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. I was ridiculous. But I had to play the idiot in order to catch
them. That’s done. I am master of the situation.”</p>
			<p>Monsieur Walter could not get over it, and watched Du Roy with startling
eyes, thinking: “Hang it, here is a fellow to be looked after.”</p>
			<p>George went on: “I am now free. I have some money. I shall offer myself
as a candidate at the October elections for my native place, where I am
well known. I could not take a position or make myself respected with
that woman, who was suspected by every one. She had caught me like a
fool, humbugged and ensnared me. But since I became alive to her little
game I kept watch on her, the slut.” He began to laugh, and added: “It
was poor Forestier who was cuckold, a cuckold without imagining it,
confiding and tranquil. Now I am free from the leprosy he left me. My
hands are free. Now I shall get on.” He had seated himself astride a
chair, and repeated, as though thinking aloud, “I shall get on.”</p>
			<p>And Daddy Walter, still looking at him with unveiled eyes, his
spectacles remaining pushed up on his forehead, said to himself: “Yes,
he will get on, the rascal.”</p>
			<p>George rose. “I am going to write the article. It must be done
discreetly. But you know it will be terrible for the minister. He has
gone to smash. He cannot be picked up again. The <i>Vie Francaise</i> has no
longer any interest to spare him.”</p>
			<p>The old fellow hesitated for a few moments, and then made up his mind.
“Do so,” said he; “so much the worse for those who get into such
messes.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
