<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="VIII" name="VIII"/>VIII</h2>
			<p>His duel had given Duroy a position among the leader-writers of the <i>Vie
Francaise</i>, but as he had great difficulty in finding ideas, he made a
specialty of declamatory articles on the decadence of morality, the
lowering of the standard of character, the weakening of the patriotic
fiber and the anemia of French honor. He had discovered the word anemia,
and was very proud of it. And when Madame de Marelle, filled with that
skeptical, mocking, and incredulous spirit characteristic of the
Parisian, laughed at his tirades, which she demolished with an epigram,
he replied with a smile: “Bah! this sort of thing will give me a good
reputation later on.”</p>
			<p>He now resided in the Rue de Constantinople, whither he had shifted his
portmanteau, his hair-brush, his razor, and his soap, which was what his
moving amounted to. Twice or thrice a week she would call before he was
up, undress in a twinkling, and slip into bed, shivering from the cold
prevailing out of doors. As a set off, Duroy dined every Thursday at her
residence, and paid court to her husband by talking agriculture with
him. As he was himself fond of everything relating to the cultivation of
the soil, they sometimes both grew so interested in the subject of their
conversation that they quite forgot the wife dozing on the sofa. Laurine
would also go to sleep, now on the knee of her father and now on that of
Pretty-boy. And when the journalist had left, Monsieur de Marelle never
failed to assert, in that doctrinal tone in which he said the least
thing: “That young fellow is really very pleasant company, he has a
well-informed mind.”</p>
			<p>February was drawing to a close. One began to smell the violets in the
street, as one passed the barrows of the flower-sellers of a morning.
Duroy was living beneath a sky without a cloud.</p>
			<p>One night, on returning home, he found a letter that had been slipped
under his door. He glanced at the post-mark, and read “Cannes.” Having
opened it, he read:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Villa Jolie, Cannes.</p>
				<p>“<span class="smcap">Dear Sir and Friend</span>⁠—You told me, did you not, that I could
reckon upon you for anything? Well, I have a very painful
service to ask of you; it is to come and help me, so that I may
not be left alone during the last moments of Charles, who is
dying. He may not last out the week, as the doctor has
forewarned me, although he has not yet taken to his bed. I have
no longer strength nor courage to witness this hourly death,
and I think with terror of those last moments which are drawing
near. I can only ask such a service of you, as my husband has
no relatives. You were his comrade; he opened the door of the
paper to you. Come, I beg of you; I have no one else to ask.</p>
				<p>“Believe me, your very sincere friend,</p>
				<p>“<span class="smcap">Madeleine Forestier.</span>”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>A strange feeling filled George’s heart, a sense of freedom and of a
space opening before him, and he murmured: “To be sure, I’ll go. Poor
Charles! What are we, after all?”</p>
			<p>The governor, to whom he read the letter, grumblingly granted
permission, repeating: “But be back soon, you are indispensable to us.”</p>
			<p>George left for Cannes next day by the seven o’clock express, after
letting the Marelles know of his departure by a telegram. He arrived the
following evening about four o’clock. A commissionaire guided him to the
Villa Jolie, built half-way up the slope of the pine forest clothed
with white houses, which extends from Cannes to the Golfe Juan. The
house⁠—small, low, and in the Italian style⁠—was built beside the road
which winds zig-zag fashion up through the trees, revealing a succession
of charming views at every turning it makes.</p>
			<p>The man servant opened the door, and exclaimed: “Oh! Sir, madame is
expecting you most impatiently.”</p>
			<p>“How is your master?” inquired Duroy.</p>
			<p>“Not at all well, sir. He cannot last much longer.”</p>
			<p>The drawing-room, into which George was shown, was hung with pink and
blue chintz. The tall and wide windows overlooked the town and the sea.
Duroy muttered: “By Jove, this is nice and swell for a country house.
Where the deuce do they get the money from?”</p>
			<p>The rustle of a dress made him turn round. Madame Forestier held out
both hands to him. “How good of you to come, how good of you to come,”
said she.</p>
			<p>And suddenly she kissed him on the cheek. Then they looked at
one another. She was somewhat paler and thinner, but still
fresh-complexioned, and perhaps still prettier for her additional
delicacy. She murmured: “He is dreadful, do you know; he knows that he
is doomed, and he leads me a fearful life. But where is your
portmanteau?”</p>
			<p>“I have left it at the station, not knowing what hotel you would like me
to stop at in order to be near you.”</p>
			<p>She hesitated a moment, and then said: “You must stay here. Besides,
your room is all ready. He might die at any moment, and if it were to
happen during the night I should be alone. I will send for your
luggage.”</p>
			<p>He bowed, saying: “As you please.”</p>
			<p>“Now let us go upstairs,” she said.</p>
			<p>He followed her. She opened a door on the first floor, and Duroy saw,
wrapped in rugs and seated in an armchair near the window, a kind of
living corpse, livid even under the red light of the setting sun, and
looking towards him. He scarcely recognized, but rather guessed, that it
was his friend. The room reeked of fever, medicated drinks, ether, tar,
the nameless and oppressive odor of a consumptive’s sick room. Forestier
held out his hand slowly and with difficulty. “So here you are; you have
come to see me die, then! Thanks.”</p>
			<p>Duroy affected to laugh. “To see you die? That would not be a very
amusing sight, and I should not select such an occasion to visit Cannes.
I came to give you a look in, and to rest myself a bit.”</p>
			<p>Forestier murmured, “Sit down,” and then bent his head, as though lost
in painful thoughts. He breathed hurriedly and pantingly, and from time
to time gave a kind of groan, as if he wanted to remind the others how
ill he was.</p>
			<p>Seeing that he would not speak, his wife came and leaned against the
window-sill, and indicating the view with a motion of her head, said,
“Look! Is not that beautiful?”</p>
			<p>Before them the hillside, dotted with villas, sloped downwards towards
the town, which stretched in a half-circle along the shore with its head
to the right in the direction of the pier, overlooked by the old city
surmounted by its belfry, and its feet to the left towards the point of
La Croisette, facing the Isles of Lerins. These two islands appeared
like two green spots amidst the blue water. They seemed to be floating
on it like two huge green leaves, so low and flat did they appear from
this height. Afar off, bounding the view on the other side of the bay,
beyond the pier and the belfry, a long succession of blue hills showed
up against a dazzling sky, their strange and picturesque line of summits
now rounded, now forked, now pointed, ending with a huge pyramidal
mountain, its foot in the sea itself.</p>
			<p>Madame Forestier pointed it out, saying: “This is L’Estherel.”</p>
			<p>The void beyond the dark hill tops was red, a glowing red that the eye
would not fear, and Duroy, despite himself, felt the majesty of the
close of the day. He murmured, finding no other term strong enough to
express his admiration, “It is stunning.”</p>
			<p>Forestier raised his head, and turning to his wife, said: “Let me have
some fresh air.”</p>
			<p>“Pray, be careful,” was her reply. “It is late, and the sun is setting;
you will catch a fresh cold, and you know how bad that is for you.”</p>
			<p>He made a feverish and feeble movement with his right hand that was
almost meant for a blow, and murmured with a look of anger, the grin of
a dying man that showed all the thinness of his lips, the hollowness of
the cheeks, and the prominence of all the bones of the face: “I tell you
I am stifling. What does it matter to you whether I die a day sooner or
a day later, since I am done for?”</p>
			<p>She opened the window quite wide. The air that entered surprised all
three like a caress. It was a soft, warm breeze, a breeze of spring,
already laden with the scents of the odoriferous shrubs and flowers
which sprang up along this shore. A powerful scent of turpentine and
the harsh savor of the eucalyptus could be distinguished.</p>
			<p>Forestier drank it in with short and fevered gasps. He clutched the arm
of his chair with his nails, and said in low, hissing, and savage tones:
“Shut the window. It hurts me; I would rather die in a cellar.”</p>
			<p>His wife slowly closed the window, and then looked out in space, her
forehead against the pane. Duroy, feeling very ill at ease, would have
liked to have chatted with the invalid and reassured him. But he could
think of nothing to comfort him. At length he said: “Then you have not
got any better since you have been here?”</p>
			<p>Forestier shrugged his shoulders with low-spirited impatience. “You see
very well I have not,” he replied, and again lowered his head.</p>
			<p>Duroy went on: “Hang it all, it is ever so much nicer here than in
Paris. We are still in the middle of winter there. It snows, it freezes,
it rains, and it is dark enough for the lamps to be lit at three in the
afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“Anything new at the paper?” asked Forestier.</p>
			<p>“Nothing. They have taken on young Lacrin, who has left the <i>Voltaire</i>,
to do your work, but he is not up to it. It is time that you came back.”</p>
			<p>The invalid muttered: “I⁠—I shall do all my work six feet under the sod
now.”</p>
			<p>This fixed idea recurred like a knell <i>apropos</i> of everything,
continually cropping up in every idea, every sentence. There was a long
silence, a deep and painful silence. The glow of the sunset was slowly
fading, and the mountains were growing black against the red sky, which
was getting duller. A colored shadow, a commencement of night, which yet
retained the glow of an expiring furnace, stole into the room and seemed
to tinge the furniture, the walls, the hangings, with mingled tints of
sable and crimson. The chimney-glass, reflecting the horizon, seemed
like a patch of blood. Madame Forestier did not stir, but remained
standing with her back to the room, her face to the window pane.</p>
			<p>Forestier began to speak in a broken, breathless voice, heartrending to
listen to. “How many more sunsets shall I see? Eight, ten, fifteen, or
twenty, perhaps thirty⁠—no more. You have time before you; for me it is
all over. And it will go on all the same, after I am gone, as if I was
still here.” He was silent for a few moments, and then continued: “All
that I see reminds me that in a few days I shall see it no more. It is
horrible. I shall see nothing⁠—nothing of all that exists; not the
smallest things one makes use of⁠—the plates, the glasses, the beds in
which one rests so comfortably, the carriages. How nice it is to drive
out of an evening! How fond I was of all those things!”</p>
			<p>He nervously moved the fingers of both hands, as though playing the
piano on the arms of his chair. Each of his silences was more painful
than his words, so evident was it that his thoughts must be fearful.
Duroy suddenly recalled what Norbert de Varenne had said to him some
weeks before, “I now see death so near that I often want to stretch out
my arms to put it back. I see it everywhere. The insects crushed on the
path, the falling leaves, the white hair in a friend’s beard, rend my
heart and cry to me, ‘Behold!’ ”</p>
			<p>He had not understood all this on that occasion; now, seeing Forestier,
he did. An unknown pain assailed him, as if he himself was sensible of
the presence of death, hideous death, hard by, within reach of his hand,
on the chair in which his friend lay gasping. He longed to get up, to go
away, to fly, to return to Paris at once. Oh! if he had known he would
not have come.</p>
			<p>Darkness had now spread over the room, like premature mourning for the
dying man. The window alone remained still visible, showing, within the
lighter square formed by it, the motionless outline of the young wife.</p>
			<p>Forestier remarked, with irritation, “Well, are they going to bring in
the lamp to-night? This is what they call looking after an invalid.”</p>
			<p>The shadow outlined against the window panes disappeared, and the sound
of an electric bell rang through the house. A servant shortly entered
and placed a lamp on the mantelpiece. Madame Forestier said to her
husband, “Will you go to bed, or would you rather come down to dinner?”</p>
			<p>He murmured: “I will come down.”</p>
			<p>Waiting for this meal kept them all three sitting still for nearly an
hour, only uttering from time to time some needless commonplace remark,
as if there had been some danger, some mysterious danger in letting
silence endure too long, in letting the air congeal in this room where
death was prowling.</p>
			<p>At length dinner was announced. The meal seemed interminable to Duroy.
They did not speak, but ate noiselessly, and then crumbled their bread
with their fingers. The man servant who waited upon them went to and fro
without the sound of his footsteps being heard, for as the creak of a
boot-sole irritated Charles, he wore list slippers. The harsh tick of a
wooden clock alone disturbed the calm with its mechanical and regular
sound.</p>
			<p>As soon as dinner was over Duroy, on the plea of fatigue, retired to his
room, and leaning on the window-sill watched the full moon, in the midst
of the sky like an immense lamp, casting its cold gleam upon the white
walls of the villas, and scattering over the sea a soft and moving
dappled light. He strove to find some reason to justify a swift
departure, inventing plans, telegrams he was to receive, a recall from
Monsieur Walter.</p>
			<p>But his resolves to fly appeared more difficult to realize on awakening
the next morning. Madame Forestier would not be taken in by his devices,
and he would lose by his cowardice all the benefit of his self-devotion.
He said to himself: “Bah! it is awkward; well so much the worse, there
must be unpleasant situations in life, and, besides, it will perhaps be
soon over.”</p>
			<p>It was a bright day, one of those bright Southern days that make the
heart feel light, and Duroy walked down to the sea, thinking that it
would be soon enough to see Forestier some time in course of the
afternoon. When he returned to lunch, the servant remarked, “Master has
already asked for you two or three times, sir. Will you please step up
to his room, sir?”</p>
			<p>He went upstairs. Forestier appeared to be dozing in his armchair. His
wife was reading, stretched out on the sofa.</p>
			<p>The invalid raised his head, and Duroy said, “Well, how do you feel? You
seem quite fresh this morning.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I am better, I have recovered some of my strength. Get through
your lunch with Madeleine as soon as you can, for we are going out for
a drive.”</p>
			<p>As soon as she was alone with Duroy, the young wife said to him, “There,
to-day he thinks he is all right again. He has been making plans all the
morning. We are going to the Golfe Juan now to buy some pottery for our
rooms in Paris. He is determined to go out, but I am horribly afraid of
some mishap. He cannot bear the shaking of the drive.”</p>
			<p>When the landau arrived, Forestier came down stairs a step at a time,
supported by his servant. But as soon as he caught sight of the
carriage, he ordered the hood to be taken off. His wife opposed this,
saying, “You will catch cold. It is madness.”</p>
			<p>He persisted, repeating, “Oh, I am much better. I feel it.”</p>
			<p>They passed at first along some of those shady roads, bordered by
gardens, which cause Cannes to resemble a kind of English Park, and then
reached the highway to Antibes, running along the seashore. Forestier
acted as guide. He had already pointed out the villa of the Court de
Paris, and now indicated others. He was lively, with the forced and
feeble gayety of a doomed man. He lifted his finger, no longer having
strength to stretch out his arm, and said, “There is the Ile Sainte
Marguerite, and the chateau from which Bazaine escaped. How they did
humbug us over that matter!”</p>
			<p>Then regimental recollections recurred to him, and he mentioned various
officers whose names recalled incidents to them. But all at once, the
road making a turn, they caught sight of the whole of the Golfe Juan,
with the white village in the curve of the bay, and the point of Antibes
at the further side of it. Forestier, suddenly seized upon by childish
glee, exclaimed, “Ah! the squadron, you will see the squadron.”</p>
			<p>Indeed they could perceive, in the middle of the broad bay, half-a-dozen
large ships resembling rocks covered with leafless trees. They were
huge, strange, mis-shapen, with excrescences, turrets, rams, burying
themselves in the water as though to take root beneath the waves. One
could scarcely imagine how they could stir or move about, they seemed so
heavy and so firmly fixed to the bottom. A floating battery, circular
and high out of water, resembling the light-houses that are built on
shoals. A tall three-master passed near them, with all its white sails
set. It looked graceful and pretty beside these iron war monsters
squatted on the water. Forestier tried to make them out. He pointed out
the Colbert, the Suffren, the Admiral Duperre, the Redoubtable, the
Devastation, and then checking himself, added, “No I made a mistake;
that one is the Devastation.”</p>
			<p>They arrived opposite a species of large pavilion, on the front of which
was the inscription, “Art Pottery of the Golfe Juan,” and the carriage,
driving up the sweep, stopped before the door. Forestier wanted to buy a
couple of vases for his study. As he felt unequal to getting out of the
carriage, specimens were brought out to him one after the other. He was
a long time in making a choice, and consulted his wife and Duroy.</p>
			<p>“You know,” he said, “it is for the cabinet at the end of the study.
Sitting in my chair, I have it before my eyes all the time. I want an
antique form, a Greek outline.” He examined the specimens, had others
brought, and then turned again to the first ones. At length he made up
his mind, and having paid, insisted upon the articles being sent on at
once. “I shall be going back to Paris in a few days,” he said.</p>
			<p>They drove home, but as they skirted the bay a rush of cold air from one
of the valleys suddenly met them, and the invalid began to cough. It was
nothing at first, but it augmented and became an unbroken fit of
coughing, and then a kind of gasping hiccough.</p>
			<p>Forestier was choking, and every time he tried to draw breath the cough
seemed to rend his chest. Nothing would soothe or check it. He had to be
borne from the carriage to his room, and Duroy, who supported his legs,
felt the jerking of his feet at each convulsion of his lungs. The warmth
of the bed did not check the attack, which lasted till midnight, when,
at length, narcotics lulled its deadly spasm. The sick man remained till
morning sitting up in his bed, with his eyes open.</p>
			<p>The first words he uttered were to ask for the barber, for he insisted
on being shaved every morning. He got up for this operation, but had to
be helped back into bed at once, and his breathing grew so short, so
hard, and so difficult, that Madame Forestier, in alarm, had Duroy, who
had just turned in, roused up again in order to beg him to go for the
doctor.</p>
			<p>He came back almost immediately with Dr. Gavaut, who prescribed a
soothing drink and gave some advice; but when the journalist saw him to
the door, in order to ask his real opinion, he said, “It is the end. He
will be dead to-morrow morning. Break it to his poor wife, and send for
a priest. I, for my part, can do nothing more. I am, however, entirely
at your service.”</p>
			<p>Duroy sent for Madame Forestier. “He is dying,” said he. “The doctor
advises a priest being sent for. What would you like done?”</p>
			<p>She hesitated for some time, and then, in slow tones, as though she had
calculated everything, replied, “Yes, that will be best⁠—in many
respects. I will break it to him⁠—tell him the vicar wants to see him,
or something or other; I really don’t know what. You would be very kind
if you would go and find a priest for me and pick one out. Choose one
who won’t raise too many difficulties over the business. One who will be
satisfied with confession, and will let us off with the rest of it all.”</p>
			<p>The young fellow returned with a complaisant old ecclesiastic, who
accommodated himself to the state of affairs. As soon as he had gone
into the dying man’s room, Madame Forestier came out of it, and sat down
with Duroy in the one adjoining.</p>
			<p>“It has quite upset him,” said she. “When I spoke to him about a priest
his face assumed a frightful expression as if he had felt the
breath⁠—the breath of⁠—you know. He understood that it was all over at
last, and that his hours were numbered.” She was very pale as she
continued, “I shall never forget the expression of his face. He
certainly saw death face to face at that moment. He saw him.”</p>
			<p>They could hear the priest, who spoke in somewhat loud tones, being
slightly deaf, and who was saying, “No, no; you are not so bad as all
that. You are ill, but in no danger. And the proof is that I have called
in as a friend as a neighbor.”</p>
			<p>They could not make out Forestier’s reply, but the old man went on, “No,
I will not ask you to communicate. We will talk of that when you are
better. If you wish to profit by my visit⁠—to confess, for instance⁠—I
ask nothing better. I am a shepherd, you know, and seize on every
occasion to bring a lamb back to the fold.”</p>
			<p>A long silence followed. Forestier must have been speaking in a faint
voice. Then all at once the priest uttered in a different tone, the tone
of one officiating at the altar. “The mercy of God is infinite. Repeat
the Comfiteor, my son. You have perhaps forgotten it; I will help you.
Repeat after me: ‘Comfiteor Deo omnipotenti⁠—Beata Maria semper
virgini.’ ”</p>
			<p>He paused from time to time to allow the dying man to catch him up. Then
he said, “And now confess.”</p>
			<p>The young wife and Duroy sat still seized on by a strange uneasiness,
stirred by anxious expectation. The invalid had murmured something. The
priest repeated, “You have given way to guilty pleasures⁠—of what kind,
my son?”</p>
			<p>Madeleine rose and said, “Let us go down into the garden for a short
time. We must not listen to his secrets.”</p>
			<p>And they went and sat down on a bench before the door beneath a rose
tree in bloom, and beside a bed of pinks, which shed their soft and
powerful perfume abroad in the pure air. Duroy, after a few moments’
silence, inquired, “Shall you be long before you return to Paris?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no,” she replied. “As soon as it is all over I shall go back
there.”</p>
			<p>“Within ten days?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, at the most.”</p>
			<p>“He has no relations, then?”</p>
			<p>“None except cousins. His father and mother died when he was quite
young.”</p>
			<p>They both watched a butterfly sipping existence from the pinks, passing
from one to another with a soft flutter of his wings, which continued to
flap slowly when he alighted on a flower. They remained silent for a
considerable time.</p>
			<p>The servant came to inform them that “the priest had finished,” and they
went upstairs together.</p>
			<p>Forestier seemed to have grown still thinner since the day before. The
priest held out his hand to him, saying, “Good-day, my son, I shall call
in again to-morrow morning,” and took his departure.</p>
			<p>As soon as he had left the room the dying man, who was panting for
breath, strove to hold out his two hands to his wife, and gasped, “Save
me⁠—save me, darling, I don’t want to die⁠—I don’t want to die. Oh! save
me⁠—tell me what I had better do; send for the doctor. I will take
whatever you like. I won’t die⁠—I won’t die.”</p>
			<p>He wept. Big tears streamed from his eyes down his fleshless cheeks, and
the corners of his mouth contracted like those of a vexed child. Then
his hands, falling back on the bed clothes, began a slow, regular, and
continuous movement, as though trying to pick something off the sheet.</p>
			<p>His wife, who began to cry too, said: “No, no, it is nothing. It is only
a passing attack, you will be better to-morrow, you tired yourself too
much going out yesterday.”</p>
			<p>Forestier’s breathing was shorter than that of a dog who has been
running, so quick that it could not be counted, so faint that it could
scarcely be heard.</p>
			<p>He kept repeating: “I don’t want to die. Oh! God⁠—God⁠—God; what is to
become of me? I shall no longer see anything⁠—anything any more. Oh!
God.”</p>
			<p>He saw before him some hideous thing invisible to the others, and his
staring eyes reflected the terror it inspired. His two hands continued
their horrible and wearisome action. All at once he started with a sharp
shudder that could be seen to thrill the whole of his body, and jerked
out the words, “The graveyard⁠—I⁠—Oh! God.”</p>
			<p>He said no more, but lay motionless, haggard and panting.</p>
			<p>Time sped on, noon struck by the clock of a neighboring convent. Duroy
left the room to eat a mouthful or two. He came back an hour later.
Madame Forestier refused to take anything. The invalid had not stirred.
He still continued to draw his thin fingers along the sheet as though to
pull it up over his face.</p>
			<p>His wife was seated in an armchair at the foot of the bed. Duroy took
another beside her, and they waited in silence. A nurse had come, sent
in by the doctor, and was dozing near the window.</p>
			<p>Duroy himself was beginning to doze off when he felt that something was
happening. He opened his eyes just in time to see Forestier close his,
like two lights dying out. A faint rattle stirred in the throat of the
dying man, and two streaks of blood appeared at the corners of his
mouth, and then flowed down into his shirt. His hands ceased their
hideous motion. He had ceased to breathe.</p>
			<p>His wife understood this, and uttering a kind of shriek, she fell on her
knees sobbing, with her face buried in the bed-clothes. George,
surprised and scared, mechanically made the sign of the cross. The nurse
awakened, drew near the bed. “It is all over,” said she.</p>
			<p>Duroy, who was recovering his self-possession, murmured, with a sigh of
relief: “It was sooner over than I thought for.”</p>
			<p>When the first shock was over and the first tears shed, they had to busy
themselves with all the cares and all the necessary steps a dead man
exacts. Duroy was running about till nightfall. He was very hungry when
he got back. Madame Forestier ate a little, and then they both installed
themselves in the chamber of death to watch the body. Two candles burned
on the night-table beside a plate filled with holy water, in which lay a
sprig of mimosa, for they had not been able to get the necessary twig of
consecrated box.</p>
			<p>They were alone, the young man and the young wife, beside him who was no
more. They sat without speaking, thinking and watching.</p>
			<p>George, whom the darkness rendered uneasy in presence of the corpse,
kept his eyes on this persistently. His eye and his mind were both
attracted and fascinated by this fleshless visage, which the vacillating
light caused to appear yet more hollow. That was his friend Charles
Forestier, who was chatting with him only the day before! What a strange
and fearful thing was this end of a human being! Oh! how he recalled the
words of Norbert de Varenne haunted by the fear of death: “No one ever
comes back.” Millions on millions would be born almost identical, with
eyes, a nose, a mouth, a skull and a mind within it, without he who lay
there on the bed ever reappearing again.</p>
			<p>For some years he had lived, eaten, laughed, loved, hoped like all the
world. And it was all over for him all over for ever. Life; a few days,
and then nothing. One is born, one grows up, one is happy, one waits,
and then one dies. Farewell, man or woman, you will not return again to
earth. Plants, beast, men, stars, worlds, all spring to life, and then
die to be transformed anew. But never one of them comes back⁠—insect,
man, nor planet.</p>
			<p>A huge, confused, and crushing sense of terror weighed down the soul of
Duroy, the terror of that boundless and inevitable annihilation
destroying all existence. He already bowed his head before its menace.
He thought of the flies who live a few hours, the beasts who live a few
days, the men who live a few years, the worlds which live a few
centuries. What was the difference between one and the other? A few more
days’ dawn that was all.</p>
			<p>He turned away his eyes in order no longer to have the corpse before
them. Madame Forestier, with bent head, seemed also absorbed in painful
thoughts. Her fair hair showed so prettily with her pale face, that a
feeling, sweet as the touch of hope flitted through the young fellow’s
breast. Why grieve when he had still so many years before him? And he
began to observe her. Lost in thought she did not notice him. He said to
himself, “That, though, is the only good thing in life, to love, to hold
the woman one loves in one’s arms. That is the limit of human
happiness.”</p>
			<p>What luck the dead man had had to meet such an intelligent and charming
companion! How had they become acquainted? How ever had she agreed on
her part to marry that poor and commonplace young fellow? How had she
succeeded in making someone of him? Then he thought of all the hidden
mysteries of people’s lives. He remembered what had been whispered about
the Count de Vaudrec, who had dowered and married her off it was said.</p>
			<p>What would she do now? Whom would she marry? A deputy, as Madame de
Marelle fancied, or some young fellow with a future before him, a higher
class Forestier? Had she any projects, any plans, any settled ideas? How
he would have liked to know that. But why this anxiety as to what she
would do? He asked himself this, and perceived that his uneasiness was
due to one of those half-formed and secret ideas which one hides from
even one’s self, and only discovers when fathoming one’s self to the
very bottom.</p>
			<p>Yes, why should he not attempt this conquest himself? How strong and
redoubtable he would be with her beside him!</p>
			<p>How quick, and far, and surely he would fly! And why should he not
succeed too? He felt that he pleased her, that she had for him more than
mere sympathy; in fact, one of those affections which spring up between
two kindred spirits and which partake as much of silent seduction as of
a species of mute complicity. She knew him to be intelligent, resolute,
and tenacious, she would have confidence in him.</p>
			<p>Had she not sent for him under the present grave circumstances? And why
had she summoned him? Ought he not to see in this a kind of choice, a
species of confession. If she had thought of him just at the moment she
was about to become a widow, it was perhaps that she had thought of one
who was again to become her companion and ally? An impatient desire to
know this, to question her, to learn her intentions, assailed him. He
would have to leave on the next day but one, as he could not remain
alone with her in the house. So it was necessary to be quick, it was
necessary before returning to Paris to become acquainted, cleverly and
delicately, with her projects, and not to allow her to go back on them,
to yield perhaps to the solicitations of another, and pledge herself
irrevocably.</p>
			<p>The silence in the room was intense, nothing was audible save the
regular and metallic tick of the pendulum of the clock on the
mantelpiece.</p>
			<p>He murmured: “You must be very tired?”</p>
			<p>She replied: “Yes; but I am, above all, overwhelmed.”</p>
			<p>The sound of their own voices startled them, ringing strangely in this
gloomy room, and they suddenly glanced at the dead man’s face as though
they expected to see it move on hearing them, as it had done some hours
before.</p>
			<p>Duroy resumed: “Oh! it is a heavy blow for you, and such a complete
change in your existence, a shock to your heart and your whole life.”</p>
			<p>She gave a long sigh, without replying, and he continued, “It is so
painful for a young woman to find herself alone as you will be.”</p>
			<p>He paused, but she said nothing, and he again went on, “At all events,
you know the compact entered into between us. You can make what use of
me you will. I belong to you.”</p>
			<p>She held out her hand, giving him at the same time one of those sweet,
sad looks which stir us to the very marrow.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, you are very kind,” she said. “If I dared, and if I could do
anything for you, I, too, should say, ‘You may count upon me.’ ”</p>
			<p>He had taken the proffered hand and kept it clasped in his, with a
burning desire to kiss it. He made up his mind to this at last, and
slowly raising it to his mouth, held the delicate skin, warm, slightly
feverish and perfumed, to his lips for some time. Then, when he felt
that his friendly caress was on the point of becoming too prolonged, he
let fall the little hand. It sank back gently onto the knee of its
mistress, who said, gravely: “Yes, I shall be very lonely, but I shall
strive to be brave.”</p>
			<p>He did not know how to give her to understand that he would be happy,
very happy, to have her for his wife in his turn. Certainly he could not
tell her so at that hour, in that place, before that corpse; yet he
might, it seemed to him, hit upon one of those ambiguous, decorous, and
complicated phrases which have a hidden meaning under their words, and
which express all one wants to by their studied reticence. But the
corpse incommoded him, the stiffened corpse stretched out before them,
and which he felt between them. For some time past, too, he fancied he
detected in the close atmosphere of the room a suspicious odor, a
fœtid breath exhaling from the decomposing chest, the first whiff of
carrion which the dead lying on their bed throw out to the relatives
watching them, and with which they soon fill the hollow of their
coffin.</p>
			<p>“Cannot we open the window a little?” said Duroy. “It seems to me that
the air is tainted.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she replied, “I have just noticed it, too.”</p>
			<p>He went to the window and opened it. All the perfumed freshness of night
flowed in, agitating the flame of the two lighted candles beside the
bed. The moon was shedding, as on the former evening, her full mellow
light upon the white walls of the villas and the broad glittering
expanse of the sea. Duroy, drawing in the air to the full depth of his
lungs, felt himself suddenly seized with hope, and, as it were buoyed up
by the approach of happiness. He turned round, saying: “Come and get a
little fresh air. It is delightful.”</p>
			<p>She came quietly, and leant on the window-sill beside him. Then he
murmured in a low tone: “Listen to me, and try to understand what I want
to tell you. Above all, do not be indignant at my speaking to you of
such a matter at such a moment, for I shall leave you the day after
to-morrow, and when you return to Paris it may be too late. I am only a
poor devil without fortune, and with a position yet to make, as you
know. But I have a firm will, some brains I believe, and I am well on
the right track. With a man who has made his position, one knows what
one gets; with one who is starting, one never knows where he may finish.
So much the worse, or so much the better. In short, I told you one day
at your house that my brightest dream would have been to have married a
woman like you. I repeat this wish to you now. Do not answer, let me
continue. It is not a proposal I am making to you. The time and place
would render that odious. I wish only not to leave you ignorant that you
can make me happy with a word; that you can make me either a friend and
brother, or a husband, at your will; that my heart and myself are yours.
I do not want you to answer me now. I do not want us to speak any more
about the matter here. When we meet again in Paris you will let me know
what you have resolved upon. Until then, not a word. Is it not so?” He
had uttered all this without looking at her, as though scattering his
words abroad in the night before him. She seemed not to have heard them,
so motionless had she remained, looking also straight before her with a
fixed and vague stare at the vast landscape lit up by the moon. They
remained for some time side by side, elbow touching elbow, silent and
reflecting. Then she murmured: “It is rather cold,” and turning round,
returned towards the bed.</p>
			<p>He followed her. When he drew near he recognized that Forestier’s body
was really beginning to smell, and drew his chair to a distance, for he
could not have stood this odor of putrefaction long. He said: “He must
be put in a coffin the first thing in the morning.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, it is arranged,” she replied. “The undertaker will be here at
eight o’clock.”</p>
			<p>Duroy having sighed out the words, “Poor fellow,” she, too, gave a long
sigh of heartrending resignation.</p>
			<p>They did not look at the body so often now, already accustomed to the
idea of it, and beginning to mentally consent to the decease which but a
short time back had shocked and angered them⁠—them who were mortals,
too. They no longer spoke, continuing to keep watch in befitting fashion
without going to sleep. But towards midnight Duroy dozed off the first.
When he woke up he saw that Madame Forestier was also slumbering, and
having shifted to a more comfortable position, he reclosed his eyes,
growling: “Confound it all, it is more comfortable between the sheets
all the same.”</p>
			<p>A sudden noise made him start up. The nurse was entering the room. It
was broad daylight. The young wife in the armchair in front of him
seemed as surprised as himself. She was somewhat pale, but still pretty,
fresh-looking, and nice, in spite of this night passed in a chair.</p>
			<p>Then, having glanced at the corpse, Duroy started and exclaimed: “Oh,
his beard!” The beard had grown in a few hours on this decomposing flesh
as much as it would have in several days on a living face. And they
stood scared by this life continuing in death, as though in presence of
some fearful prodigy, some supernatural threat of resurrection, one of
these startling and abnormal events which upset and confound the mind.</p>
			<p>They both went and lay down until eleven o’clock. Then they placed
Charles in his coffin, and at once felt relieved and soothed. They had
sat down face to face at lunch with an aroused desire to speak of the
livelier and more consolatory matters, to return to the things of life
again, since they had done with the dead. Through the wide-open window
the soft warmth of spring flowed in, bearing the perfumed breath of the
bed of pinks in bloom before the door.</p>
			<p>Madame Forestier suggested a stroll in the garden to Duroy, and they
began to walk slowly round the little lawn, inhaling with pleasure the
balmy air, laden with the scent of pine and eucalyptus. Suddenly she
began to speak, without turning her head towards him, as he had done
during the night upstairs. She uttered her words slowly, in a low and
serious voice.</p>
			<p>“Look here, my dear friend, I have deeply reflected already on what you
proposed to me, and I do not want you to go away without an answer.
Besides, I am neither going to say yes nor no. We will wait, we will
see, we will know one another better. Reflect, too, on your side. Do not
give way to impulse. But if I speak to you of this before even poor
Charles is lowered into the tomb, it is because it is necessary, after
what you have said to me, that you should thoroughly understand what
sort of woman I am, in order that you may no longer cherish the wish you
expressed to me, in case you are not of a⁠—of a⁠—disposition to
comprehend and bear with me. Understand me well. Marriage for me is not
a charm, but a partnership. I mean to be free, perfectly free as to my
ways, my acts, my going and coming. I could neither tolerate
supervision, nor jealousy, nor arguments as to my behavior. I should
undertake, be it understood, never to compromise the name of the man who
takes me as his wife, never to render him hateful and ridiculous. But
this man must also undertake to see in me an equal, an ally, and not an
inferior or an obedient and submissive wife. My notions, I know, are not
those of every one, but I shall not change them. There you are. I will
also add, do not answer me; it would be useless and unsuitable. We shall
see one another again, and shall perhaps speak of all this again later
on. Now, go for a stroll. I shall return to watch beside him. Till this
evening.”</p>
			<p>He printed a long kiss on her hand, and went away without uttering a
word. That evening they only saw one another at dinnertime. Then they
retired to their rooms, both exhausted with fatigue.</p>
			<p>Charles Forestier was buried the next day, without any funeral display,
in the cemetery at Cannes. George Duroy wished to take the Paris
express, which passed through the town at half-past one.</p>
			<p>Madame Forestier drove with him to the station. They walked quietly up
and down the platform pending the time for his departure, speaking of
trivial matters.</p>
			<p>The train rolled into the station. The journalist took his seat, and
then got out again to have a few more moments’ conversation with her,
suddenly seized as he was with sadness and a strong regret at leaving
her, as though he were about to lose her for ever.</p>
			<p>A porter shouted, “Take your seats for Marseilles, Lyons, and Paris.”
Duroy got in and leant out of the window to say a few more words. The
engine whistled, and the train began to move slowly on.</p>
			<p>The young fellow, leaning out of the carriage, watched the woman
standing still on the platform and following him with her eyes.
Suddenly, as he was about to lose sight of her, he put his hand to his
mouth and threw a kiss towards her. She returned it with a discreet and
hesitating gesture.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
